

Advance Praise for
Reinventing You
“As the corporate ladder morphs into a corporate lattice,
wher e there is no single climb towar d career success but
rather a multiplicity of ways to grow, personal branding
becomes your calling card. Reinventing You presents
eﬀective ways to help you develop your brand pr oposition.”
—Cathy Benk o, Vice Chair man, Deloitte LLP; best-selling
author, The Corporate Lattice: A chieving High P erformance
in the Changing W orld of W ork
“The days of reliable, lifelong careers—compl ete with
pension and gold watch—ar e over. With Dorie Clark’s clear,
practical, step-by-step approach to reinvention, the reader
comes to see this fact not as daunting, but rife with
opportunity and possibilit y. Enriched with riveting examples
from the worlds of business, politics, and nonpr oﬁts, this
indispensable guide will help you take contr ol of and shape
your pr ofessional life.”
—Meg Cadoux Hirshber g, author, For Better or F or Work: A
Survival Guide for Entr epreneurs and Their F amilies
“Necessity may still be the mother of invention, but today’s
relentlessly changing world necessitates reinvention,
sometimes sequential reinvention. I can think of no better
guide through that daunting process than Dorie Clark’s
wonderfully r eadable and infor mative book.”

—Robert Cialdini, author, Inﬂuence: The P sychology of
Persuasion
Reinventing You is a must-r ead for anyone who wants to
expand their career horizons and become more authentic—
in work and in life.”
—Chip Conley, author, Emotional Equations: Simple T ruths
for Cr eating Happiness + Success;  founder, Joie de V ivre
Hospitality, Inc.
OceanofPDF .com

OceanofPDF .com

C o p y r i g h t
Copyright 2013 Dorie Clark
All rights r eserved
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in or
introduced into a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any
form, or by any means (electr onic, mechanical,
photocopying, recording,  or otherwise), without the prior
permission of the publisher . Requests for permissio n should
be directed to permissions@hbsp.harvar d.edu , or mailed to
Permissions, Harvar d Business School Publishing, 60
Harvar d Way, Boston, Massachusetts 02163.
First eBook Edition: April 2013
ISBN: 978-1-4221-4413-8
OceanofPDF .com

For my mother, Gail Clark, with love
OceanofPDF .com

Contents
Copyright
1. The New Branding Landscape
2. Recognize Where Y ou’re Starting
3. Research Y our Destination
4. Test-Drive Y our P ath
5. Develop the Skills Y ou Need
6. Who’s Y our Mentor?
7. Leverage Y our Points of Diﬀerence
8. Build Y our Narrative
9. Reintroduce Y ourself
10. Prove Y our W orth
11. K eep It Going
Epilogue: Mak e Your Reinvention W ork
Appendix A : 
   Your P rofessional R einvention Self -Assessment
Appendix B:  
   Classr oom or Book Gr oup Discussion Questions
Notes
About the Author
Acknowledgments

OceanofPDF .com

CHAPTER 1
The New Branding Landscape
Are you wher e you want to be professionally? Whether you
want to advance faster at your company or change jobs or
even careers, one thing is clear : no one wants to spend a
lifetime doing a job they hate. To succeed in today’s
competitive job mark et and build a career that leverages
your unique passions and talent, it’s almost certain that at
some point you’ll need to reinvent yourself professionally—
and ensur e that others recognize the powerful contribution
you can mak e.
After all, it’s clear that the era of gold watches and
lifetime employment is over. How many people do you know
who are lifers at a comp any? For better or worse, people
today skip around professionally, forced by layoﬀs or
seeking a better title or salary . Even for those who would
have wanted to make a career at one company, the options
are limited. Harvar d Business School Professor Thomas
DeLong attributes this, in part, to a precipitous decline in
professional mentorship over the past several decades. As
senior executives were forced to take on increased
responsibilities, they stopped making time to cultiv ate rising
talent. The result, says DeLong, is executives who “start to
be suspicious about the organization and see themselves as
free agents rather than saying, ‘I can stay at this ﬁr m for the
next thirty years.’” Rapid job turnover has now become
standar d.

Even if they stay with the same company or industry,
professionals still need to reinvent themselves to keep up
with the rapid pace of corporate change. “How are you
adapting and approaching your next reinvention curve?”
asks Steven Rice, the executive vice president of human
resour ces at Silicon Valley power house Juniper Networks, of
job applican ts. “How are you staying relevant and
competitive? People have to reinvent themselves to ﬁt into
the new conte xt of work.”
Amid this new landscape of frequent job and career
changing, people are increasingly working later in life.
Sometimes that’s due to preference, and sometimes to
necessity . (Between the recession years of 2007 and 2010,
the number of working Americans ﬁfty-ﬁve and over grew
by nearly 8 percent—th e only group whose workfor ce
participation rates increased.)1 As AARP’s policy director
told the National Journal, “the resour ces they were counting
on to retire just aren’t there.”2 That means even more
opportunities, or requir ements, to reinvent yourself  over the
course of your car eer.
The lengthening careers of baby boomers also have an
impact on their kids, mille nnials struggling to ﬁnd their way
in the workfor ce and hitting a wall of more experienced
candidates eager for the same jobs. In 2011, the percentage
of employed young peopl e hit a sixty-year low.3 If your early
jobs don’t reﬂect your desir ed futur e path, it’s essential to
be strategic about how you’r e positioning yourself and your
experience in or der to maneuver to wher e you want to be.
As Henry Wadsworth Longfellow noted, “we judge
ourselves by what we feel capable of doing, while others
judge us by what we have already done.” So when  you’r e a
ﬁnance guy who moves into mark eting, a ventur e capitalist
who wants to become a career coach, or an executive trying
to win a promotion to the next level, your path may make

perfect sense to you, but that doesn’t mean it’s clear to
everyone else.
Reinvention, and overcoming past perceptions, can be a
daunting process. Not everyone needs to rebran d himself
professionally, of course. If you do have a long-ter m career
at your company and are happy with your trajectory, you
may not need to worry about it. But for many of us, that
luxury doesn’t e xist.
This book is intended to help executives at all stages of
their careers who want something diﬀer ent and better in
their professional lives—and know there has to be a more
strategic way to do it. You may be struggling to ﬁnd a
toehold in an inhospitable economic climate, like Johnna, a
young professional I’ll proﬁle later who was forced to bide
her time with retail jobs instead of hopping on the career
fast track. You may be facing a crisis in your industry that’s
forcing you to consider new options, like Tom, who was laid
oﬀ after more than two decades as a newspaper reporter .
You may, like Dan, have to ﬁght back against
misconceptions about you in order to succeed at your
company . You may be looking to build new skills and explor e
new interests, like Karen, a corporate attor ney who realized
she desperat ely needed a change. This book is an invitation
to ask what you want out of life.
When Should Y ou Reinvent Y ourself
Professionally?
 
You’re at a new phase in life and you want to be known
for something diﬀer ent.
You’ve been laid oﬀ and need to ensur e you’r e in the
best position possible to land a new job quickly .

You want to move up in your company, and you need to
take contr ol of your r eputation.
You’ve been trying to win a promotion, but feel you’re
being held back by misconceptions about what you’r e
capable of .
You’d lik e to move into a diﬀer ent ar ea of your company,
perhaps from legal to human resour ces, or from sales to
ﬁnance.
You’re just starting out in your career and haven’t built
up a powerfu l résumé yet, so you need to ﬁnd another
way to stand out.
You’re changing careers and need to make a compelling
case that your unusual backgr ound is an asset, not a
liability .
OceanofPDF .com

The Perils of Reinventing Your
Personal Brand
“Hi Dorie,” r ead the message in my inbo x, from an e xecutive
I’d been hoping to interview for this book. “I’d be happy to
talk with you, but I’d prefer to remain anonymous. I’m afraid
it migh t hurt my personal brand to be seen talking about my
personal brand!” His message was only half-joking (I did
eventually interview him), but it highlights an important
truth. Again and again, as I’ve talked about the book in
business school classr ooms and corporate boardrooms
across the country, I’ve heard from profession als who
recognize the need to reinvent themselves, but still have
qualms. Won’t it look calculating to think too hard about my
reputation? Shouldn’t I just focus on doing good work?
The idea that it’s somehow sleazy to manage your
reputation is, of course, what the anonymous executive who
e-mailed me was getting at. We can all think of examples. I
know one executive who is legendary for her ability, within
minutes of meeting any new person, to inform him or her
that she’s the graduate of two Ivy League schools, drives a
BMW, and makes six ﬁgures working at a prominent ﬁrm.
Sometimes, if several months have elapsed and she’s
forgotten she’s already met you, you’ll get to hear her spiel
again. No one lik es her .
I am in no way suggesting you should start spouting your
credentials to passersby or puﬃng up your résumé. This
book isn’t about spin or presenting yourself as something
you’r e not. It’s not about  “foghor ning” your way into other
people’s consciousness and telling them how great you are.
Instead, it’s about takin g contr ol of your life and living
strategically . Who do you want to be? And what do you need

to do to get there? This is a book about deﬁning your goals,
working hard and ethically to get there, and then making
sure that people notice once you do .
I come from the world of media relations and marketing,
so I’ll admit, I’m biased.  But I’ve also seen ﬁrsth and that
there are always plenty of talented, qualiﬁed people out
there. If you aren’t strateg ic about getting the word out in a
thoughtful way that adds value, then other people will win
the accolades instead of you.
That’s why, unfortunately, it’s no longer possible to sit
back and count on getting  noticed for your hard work alone.
Years ago, the successful Wall Street investor (and former
US Treasury Secretary) William Simon declar ed, “I have
never been  interested  in merchandising myself or
perpetuating a public image. Indeed, it is always diﬃcult to
ascertain just what your image is and it is almost impossible
to improve or diminish how people view you other than
through direct personal contact. I simply work hard and try
to be successful at what I do .”4 Simon perfectly captur es the
classic upper -crust ethos that it’s tacky to take an interest in
anything so shallow as a mere image. And certainly, he’s
right that what matters are your actions and your character,
rather than the spin you put on it.
But his response, which may have been perfectly
appropriate for a child of the Depr ession who died in 2000,
just as the internet era was rising, no longer makes sense
for any professional who aspires to excellence. The idea that
you can just keep your head down and work without any
regard to oﬃce politics, for instance, has been thoroughly
discredited (just look at the profusion of networking books,
workshops, and seminars). Even the oﬃce wallﬂower knows
he should hit the company holiday party or risk missing out
on the connections he needs to advance. So why should it
be any diﬀer ent for taking contr ol of your personal brand?

Sure, you can take a chance that perhaps you’ll be
noticed, and perhaps all those hours slaving at your desk
will pay oﬀ. But why risk it? Why not take the time to think
about how you’d like to be seen in the world and then work
strategically to accomplish that, rather than waiting for life
to happen to you?
OceanofPDF .com

My Own Reinvention
I became fascinated with the topic of reinvention because
I’ve done quite a bit of it myself . These days, I consult on
strategy and mark eting for clients like Google, Yale
University, and the National Park Service. But my ﬁrst brush
with professional reinvention came shortly after graduate
school, when  I was workin g as a rookie political reporter at a
weekly newspaper . It was a Monday afternoon; someone
told me I should stop by the HR oﬃce befor e heading home
that night. I ﬁgured there was an adjustment to our health
insurance policy or I needed to ﬁll out some forms. Instead,
after less than a year on the job, I was laid oﬀ. As my
colleagues were streaming out for the night, I had to pack
up my desk and close out my online accounts; there was no
chance to say goodbye.
The next morning, glancing at CNN over breakfast, I
watched the planes hit the World Trade Center . I lost my
reporting job on September 10, 2001, and—as the
geopolitical order spun out of contr ol and the economy
collapsed—I had to ﬁgure out how to make a living, and
what was ne xt.
Over time, despite the fear and paralysis in the
mark etplace, I built up a stream of business as a freelance
journalist. But the money wasn’t great, and I was still hoping
that I’d event ually be hired by the daily paper in my city. But
it was under a hiring freeze, subject to the same internet-
driven contraction as everyone else in the industry . For
months, I plowed on, still imagining a futur e in journalism.
So when I received an oﬀer to “switch sides” and become
the press secretary for Robert Reich, the former US Labor
Secretary who was then a guber natorial candidate, I initially
said no. But an hour later, I called back; that’s perhaps
wher e my r einvention pr ocess began.

If the world hadn’t intervened, I might still be a reporter; I
love writing, meeting new people, and breathing the oxygen
of interesting ideas. But the world is moving faster than
ever, industries change, companies collap se, and
sometimes our plans simply don’t work out. I also would
have loved to run the White House press oﬃce, but that
dream died around the time the presidential candidate I
later work ed for lost in the primaries. To survive and thrive,
you have to r einvent yourself and move on.
And sometim es, of course, your reinvention is by choice: a
creative embrace of a new direction. For a couple of years, I
ran a nonpr oﬁt advocacy group and could have done so for
several more. Instead, I decided to become an entrepreneur
and launch my consulting business, a move that’s allowed
me to travel the globe, consult for leading companies, and
earn a gr eat and fulﬁlling living.
It’s easy for me to see the connections and commo nalities
in retrospect: how my time as a journalist enabled me to be
a better spinmeister when I started working for candidates,
or how running a nonpr oﬁt gave me the broad-based
business skills, from IT to ﬁnance, that I needed to become
a consultant. But I also know those transitions might seem
random to other people (and that’s not even mentioning my
time as a documentary  ﬁlmmak er or Harvar d theology
student). For years after I started my consulting business,
people would still ask about campaigns I was working on, or
how my advocacy work was going. Hadn’t they gotten the e-
newsletters announcing my new ventur e? Or visited my new
website? Were they just not paying attention?
But, of course, lik e most people, they wer en’t. The truth is,
the vast majority of peop le aren’t focused on you (or me)
very much. That means their perceptions are probably a few
years out of date, and it’s not their fault. With hundreds, or
even thousa nds, of Facebook friends and vague social
connections, we can’t expect everyone to remember all the

details of our lives. That’s why it’s so essential that we take
charge of our own reinvention and ensur e our personal
brands r eﬂect, to the outside world, the r eality of our lives.
As a consu ltant who specializes in mark eting and
branding, once I launched my business, it was essential for
me—very quickly—to practice what I preached. I had to
make sure my contacts understood exactly what skills I had
and what services I oﬀered, and to demonstrate suﬃcient
expertise that, when the right moment came, I’d be the
consultant they tur ned to . So I honed my nar rative (what am
I bringing to the table?), crafted my content (so clients could
get a taste of my ideas and approach), and began using
every vehicle  possible—fr om speaking to writing to enlisting
“validators”—to spr ead the message.
That’s the same process any professional goes through
when reinventing herself . As I’ve built my consulting
business, crafting mark eting strategies for corporations,
executives who learned about my backgr ound would often
approach me. Could I help with their reinvention? Wher e
should they start? What  if they weren’t sure about their
destination? And how could they begin to overtur n the
entrenched perceptions others held about them? Over the
years, I’ve had the pleasur e of advising scores of executives
looking for new directions . This book is the produc t of those
conversations. I hope it proves useful as you consider your
next professional iteration.
OceanofPDF .com

The Art of Reinventing Yourself
Over the course of the next ten chapters—thr ough case
studies, exercises, and resear ch-based best practices—I’ll
guide you thr ough the pr ocess.
In chapter 2—just as every business project or military
operation has to begin with the facts on the ground—you
have to discover how you’r e currently perceived. What do
people make of you? What do they really respect? And
what’s holding you back? I’ll walk through strategies and
exercises to help you gain insight from your friends and
cowork ers so you can gather actionable intelligence without
sounding nosy, entitled, or Gestapo -esque.
After that, in chapter 3, I’ll turn to resear ching your
destination. You may know you want a change in your
professional life, but are unsur e what that looks like. I’ll lay
out strategies to investigate your potential passions in the
early stage s, from behind-the-scenes resear ch to
informational interviews, and the right way to enlist others’
help as you focus in on a new futur e.
In chapter 4, I’ll talk about ways to test-drive your path to
deter mine the perfect ﬁt. You’ll read about professionals
who have strategically deployed volunteer ing, job
shadowing, board membership, and more to plot their next
move—and learn tips for identif ying the best opportunities
and ways to maximize your e xperience.
Chapter 5 covers how to develop and reﬁne the skills
you’ll need as you reinvent yourself . How can you leverage
your existing job to prepare for the one you want? Should
you go back to graduate school, or is it a waste of money?
We’ll look at how to ascertain the most strategic, cost-
eﬃcient ways to get the knowledge you need.

Chapter 6 focuses on that elusive creatur e, the mentor :
something everyone wants, but so few people are able to
ﬁnd. I’ll talk about how to identif y good candidates, spot
unlikely gems, persuade them to help you, and get the most
out of your r elationship.
In chapter 7, I cover how to leverage your points of
diﬀer ence. Too often, outsiders will dismiss your previous
experience as irrelevant. We’ll show them how your diverse
knowledge and skills bring something new to the table, and
make you far more eﬀective than anyone else in the room.
I’ll look at examples of how people can diﬀer entiate their
brands and become well-known for being their best selves.
In chapter 8, I focus on creating your narrative. People
want to understand who you are, so we have to craft an
explanatory story that makes sense and shows continuity
from your past to the present. Most importantly, we have to
explain why your transiti on adds value to others and is an
authentic e xtension of your true natur e.
Now it’s time for the big unveiling. In chapter 9 , I’ll discuss
the nuts-and-bolts of reintroducing the new you. When’s the
right moment to introduce your new brand? Are there
strategic opportunities you can leverage? How can you win
over past friends and colleagues who know you in a
diﬀer ent conte xt and may question your new career
identity? I’ll also talk about how you can harness little-
known strategies like teaming up with validators and
identif ying the hot spots in your company or industry wher e
you’r e likely to get the most pr ofessional traction.
In chapter 10 , I’ll walk you through concr ete ways you can
demonstrate your expertise, impress the major players, and
prove your worth. Every art student has a portfolio ready to
be shown at a moment’s notice. It’s no diﬀer ent in the
business world; no one will believe you’r e serious unless you
begin to create content that demonstrates your expertise.

That allows potential customers or employers to test-drive
your approach befor e they make a large commitment. (If
you’r e a graphic designer, having contacts check out an
image gallery of corporate logos you’ve created may inspir e
them to send you that major new account.) I’ll go over
strategies such as how to leverage your online brand,
aﬃliate with brand-name organizations in your ﬁeld, get
published in major journals, build credibility through
assuming leadership positions, and mor e.
By chapter 11 , you’v e deve loped a new, robust brand, and
you need to stay on top of how it’s perceived in the
mark etplace. I’ll identif y online channels to monitor
regularly and talk about setting up your own ongoing
feedback mechanisms to keep you honest. I’ll talk about
ways to mingle your old and new brands success fully, and
the importance of staying  consistent and committe d moving
forwar d. (A desir e to expand into international work won’t
go far if you don’t make the eﬀort to learn new languages or
the nuances of other cultur es. And a onetime charitable gift
is nice, but quickly forgotten.) The key is long-ter m eﬀort,
and I’ll show you prominent examples of professionals
who’ve succeeded and e xplain why .
Finally, in the epilogue, I’ll bring it all togeth er and
summarize your road map to reinvention. As a hardworking
professional, you want to understand, and shape, how
you’r e perceived by others. By following the steps we
outline in the following chapters, you’r e on your way to
cultivating a powerful brand that reﬂects who you are—and
want to be.
OceanofPDF .com

CHAPTER 2
Recognize Where You’re Starting
The ﬁrst step in reinventing yourself professionally is getting
a handle on wher e you’r e starting. Everyone has a personal
brand, whet her some skeptics want to admit it or not:
there’s no such thing as opting out. The concept of personal
branding gained currency in the late 1990s, after a famous
Tom Peters cover story ran in Fast Company  (“The Brand
Called You”). But really what we’re talking about is
something that’s always existed: your reputation.  What do
people think of you? What do they say when you leave the
room? Understanding that, and identif ying any gaps
between the current reality and wher e you want to be in the
futur e, is critical to beginning your reinvention process.
(Even if you’r e not sure where you want to end up, starting
with a “personal brand inventory” is useful becau se it can
shed light on your unique strengths and areas wher e your
colleagues think you could mak e a contribution.)
You may think you already know how others view you—as
a skilled communicator, or an incisive numbers guy, or a
manager who always brings out the best in her team. But
then again, you might be surprised. One executive coach
told me about a client who was shock ed to hear that his
colleagues consider ed him ar rogant. Despite being a modest
and fairly self-depr ecating guy, his habit of interrupting
people convinced them he felt superior—almost the exact
opposite of the truth. This behavior, which had been

hampering his career, was easy to correct once he
recognized it.
The message you’r e giving others may be very diﬀer ent
than what you intend. So follow the advice of angel investor
Judy Robinett: “If three people tell you you’r e a horse, buy a
saddle.” In other words, listen to what those in the outside
world are telling you, because they’r e probably right. So
how do you get that feedback? There are four major ways
you can get a read on how others perceive your personal
brand. In this chapter, I’ll teach you to become your own HR
executive—or private detective—and lear n how to:
 
Conduct your own “360 interviews.”
Hold your own focus gr oup with friends and colleagues.
Examine your online pr esence.
Seek out patter ns in past perfor mance evaluations or
recommendation letters.
Finally, we’ll integrate the data to get the full pictur e
about your brand.
Getting Started
At the back of this book, in appendix A, you’ll ﬁnd “Your
Professional Reinvention Self-Assessment” worksheet,
which may be helpful to ﬁll out as you r einvent yourself .
OceanofPDF .com

Your Personal 360 Interview
The ﬁrst step when you’r e working with almost any
corporate coach is to do a “360” (as in, all directions).
Basically, that means the coach will interview everyone in
your spher e—your boss, peers, subor dinates, clients,
suppliers—and try to elicit honest feedback about you and
your performance. (It’s necessary to talk to everyone  to
locate the suck-ups who are perfect in their relationships
with their bosses and tyrants to everyone below .) It’s
obviously easier for people to speak openly to third parties
who promise anonymity (coaches usually aggregate the
data and won’t reveal who said what). If you work for a
company with a reasonable training or professional
development budget, ask if it would be willing to hire an
executive coach to work with you. Becaus e many
employees shy away from coaches, viewing them as
“remedial education for executives,” your boss is likely to be
impressed with your proactive approach to self-
improvement.
Even if your company won’t pay for a coach, it may have
recommendations about coaches you can retain personally .
They can be e xpensive, with fees in the thousands or tens of
thousands of dollars, but if you’r e in a position to do it, the
information they gather (and their recommendations based
on it) can be invaluable.  You can also ask for suggestions
from colleagues.
But what if you simply aren’t able to work with an outside
coach? Don’t worry: there are steps you can take to elicit
“360” information yourself . First, create a list of questions
you think would be helpful in enhancing your self-
knowledge. Executive coach Michael Melcher suggests
“pair ed questions” such as, “What’s my strength? What’s

not my strength? What career can you see me in? What
career can you deﬁnitely not see me in?” That format, says
Melcher, “gives people permission to give the full pictur e—
they don’t want to be too negative.” The best questions will
be the ones most relevan t to you. But just for starters, some
additional e xamples might be:
 
What ar e three wor ds you’d use to describe me?
If you didn’t already know what I do for a living, what
would you guess?
I’m trying to go from X to Y; what steps would you
suggest for me?
Who are some people who have some of the qualities I
should be trying to build?
What ar e my blind spots?
OceanofPDF .com

Tapping Y our Network
Next, identif y the people you’ll be reaching out to. Wher eas
a coach who has been hired to interview people about you
has license to talk to people in your organization, you need
to be more careful if you’r e doing your own assessment
(plus, you don’t want to tip your hand if you’r e considering a
move away from your current employer). Focus on friends,
colleagues, and family members who know you well and
whom you can trust to give you honest feedback (no
frenemies need apply). Phyllis Stein, the former director of
Radcliﬀe College Career Services at Harvar d University,
suggests identif ying up to twenty people who exemplif y the
interests, skills, and values you admir e—pr eferably a
geographically diverse assortment of men and women in
diﬀer ent ﬁelds—to get the br oadest perspective possible.
Now, it’s time to make the approach. Melcher suggests
making it clear that you want to set aside time for an
interview, not just regular  friendly chitchat. “If you tell your
friend you’r e interviewing them, they take it much more
seriously and will give you diﬀer ent answers,” he says. “You
have to signal to people why you’r e having the
conversation: ‘I’m going to spend the next twenty minutes
asking you about my brand, because I’d really like to see
how I’m per ceived.’”
Face-to -face interviews often yield better answers
because you can follow up in real time if something isn’t
clear or if you’d like to probe an answer further,  but they
don’t always work. Sometimes, geography intervenes—
you’r e in Miami and the interviewee is in Mumbai.
Sometimes, your respondent is just too busy, and the best
you’r e going to get is an e-mail pecked out on a smartphone
in between layovers. And sometimes—let’s be honest—you

can’t handle  the feedback. It’s easy enough to tamp your
down emotio ns if you’r e reading an e-mail; you can just
snap the screen shut, take a long walk, and calm down if
you see something you weren’t expecting. But in real time,
it can be harder to hide your emotions. Sometimes  the truth
can be painfu l, and if your poker face isn’t up to snuﬀ, you
may want to stick to electr onic communication.
The secret, whether you’r e meeting in person or sending
an e-mail request, is to stress the need for honesty
(otherwise, what’s the point?). New York–based coach Alisa
Cohn says you almost have to be forceful because friends’
desir e to protect you is often so strong: “Say, ‘I’m trying to
develop myself, and I know you love me, and I’d appreciate
your candid feedback about my limitations.’ And they’ll say,
‘You don’t have any,’ and you say, ‘No, I’m serious .’ You
have to get them to take it seriously . You have to cajole
them into it.”
One trick, she says, is to provide them with leads, so
they’r e not the one bringing up something negative: “You
can say, ‘I’ve gotten feedback in the past that I’m a tactical,
not a strategic think er. I’m wondering if you’ve seen that
and what you think.’ When you rat yourself out ﬁrst, they
can add on.”
OceanofPDF .com

Arranging Your Focus Group
In addition to (or instead of) one-on-one conversations,
another possibility is hosting a small group gathering. This
only works if your network is geographically proximate, but
the beneﬁt is that you can leverage the wisdom of crowds
when one person’s idea sparks another . But instead of a
Madison Avenue ad agency testing a new soda campaign or
Procter & Gamble probing which scent is more “shower
fresh,” this is a focus group wher e the focus is you. Here’s
the setup.
Identif y a group of about ﬁfteen trusted friends and
colleagues (eight to ten is the ideal number of attendees,
and you know several won’t be able to make it, and a few
others will back out the day of the gathering). Tell them that
you’d like to interview them about your brand and that
you’r e conducting a focus group to get honest feedback
because you want to grow professionally . (If you have
another friend who’s also interested in reinventing herself,
you can suggest swapping the host duties for the focus
group. You can take charge of inviting her friends and
colleagues, and vice versa. That may help if you’re shy;
after all, it’s often easie r to do things for some one else,
rather than yourself .)
But what if you don’t have a friend you can turn to? The
idea of arranging a focus group—wher e you’r e the subject of
discussion—can seem hopelessly intimidating. What if your
friends and colleagues consider it an imposition? (If they
don’t want to do it, don’t worry; they’ll ﬁnd an excuse to beg
oﬀ.) And is it really such a good idea to invite a large group
of people to get togethe r and point out your weaknesses?
What if you discover that someone you respect has a
negative perception of you—that you’r e irresponsible or
unfocused, or a bad manager?

The prospect  of facing a harsh truth can be daunti ng. But
remember : your friends and colleagues wouldn’t bother to
participate if they didn’t care about you and value you.
Everyone has strengths and weaknesses, and your posse is
coming together because they want to help you become as
successful as possible. Indeed, regardless of whether you
hold a focus group, these  are likely the people you’re going
to need to rely on in your personal reinvention. Why not
involve them in the process now and get their support?
They’r e your best hope of honest feedback about your
strengths and weaknesse s, how you’r e currently perceived,
and other intelligence that can save you time and energy in
identif ying your path forwar d. Even more importantly,
they’r e your allies—the ones you’ll turn to for mentoring,
feedback, and (eventually) new business and referrals. It
may seem like an imposition to reach out, but the truth is, it
takes a village to r einvent yourself .
OceanofPDF .com

Making It W ork
Instead of a focus group facility—they’r e very fancy, usually
located in nondescript oﬃce parks or skyscrapers, and have
confer ence rooms with a mirrored wall so the client can
observe everything from a darkened room—your living room
will probably  have to suﬃce. Make sure you have enough
comfortable chairs and, just as in real focus groups, bribe
people with dinner and/or copious, high-quality snacks.
Order plent y. Real focus groups also generally pay
participants $50–$100 for a few hours’ work, but your
friends are doing it as a favor to you. (However, if you’r e
able, it’s still a classy gesture to give a small token of your
appreciation, lik e a gif t card for coﬀee or a bookstor e.)
Because these folks are participating in your focus group
out of the goodness of their hearts, don’t abuse it. Keep the
length to ninety minutes  and be strict about timing. Allow
thirty minute s up front as a cushion for late arrivals, and for
people to mingle and snack. Then you’ve got sixty minutes
to probe the questions you most want answers to—how
you’r e perceived, your strengths and weaknesses, what kind
of jobs or envir onments people can most see you in, and so
on. Two roles are critical here: the facilitator and the scribe.
If you’r e a terriﬁc moderator—you can keep meetings going
eﬃciently, shut ramblers up politely, probe interesting
statements—then go for it. But for most people, it’s tricky to
handle, especially when the subject is you. Inste ad, tap a
friend or cowork er you think excels in this area (whose
meetings do you actually enjoy going to?), and see if they’d
be willing to help.
A good  role for you if you’re not facilitating is to be the
scribe. Sit silently in the back, don’t interrupt, and just take
notes on what people are saying. Write down anything that
seems interesting or important (it’s also a good idea, with

permission, to record the session so you can play it back
and review it in the future). You may want to interrupt or
argue, depen ding on what’s said, but your job is to stay
quiet. Instead, work out an ar rangement in advance with the
moderator so you can slip him notes with questions and he
can follow up on any k ey points.
You may also want to build in ﬁve minutes at the end of
the session and request that attendees write down a short
summary of their perceptions (three words that describe
you, the most important skill you should work on
developing, and so on). Some participants, despite your
entreaties, may be too shy to verbalize their thoughts, so
this is a good way to ensur e you’ve captur ed their insights.
Arranging your own focus group takes work, and it’s not
for everyone.  But it can yield interesting insights rapidly and
get allies on your side as you pr epare to r ebrand.
Try This
 
Make a list of the ﬁfteen people you’r e going to invite to
your focus gr oup.
What are the most important questions you want to
ask? (Aim for four to six.)
Who’s your moderator?
Mary’s F ocus Group

Mary Skelton Roberts had built an international career
as a conﬂict resolution expert.1 But eight years ago, she
found herself back in the United States looking for a new
challenge. “I felt like I had given conﬂict resolution all I
had and it was time to explor e something else,” she
recalls. She mentioned her quest to her friend Don, who
ﬂoated the idea of a personal focus group. When Don
oﬀered to run one for Mary, she immediately agr eed.
He suggested she invite participants “who knew me
really well and could speak about me in diﬀer ent phases
of my life,” Mary recalls. So she developed a list of ten
names: her “dream team” of friends and advisers who
would provide honest feedback, ranging from childhood
friends to college buddies, and from professional
colleagues to siblings.
Though some might have felt trepidation about
inviting colleagues to analyze and evaluate them, Mary
didn’t hesitate: “My friends already give me feedback
and advice, so even if it isn’t usually this scripted, I
already have  that kind of relationship with the people I
approached. Also, people said that one of my biggest
strengths was the ability to listen and give thoughtful
feedback, so some may have viewed it as an
opportunity to recipr ocate and help me out.” All ten
agreed to come.
They sat in her living room, plied with snacks, and
began ﬁlling out four worksheets Don distributed. The
top of the worksheets wer e labeled:
 
Mary’s Gr eatest Gif ts Are . . .
I Could See Mary . . .
The W orld W ould Be a Better Place If Mary . . .
I Will Help Mary by . . .

For several hours, Don led the conversation, asking
participants to share their responses for each question.
Mary sat silently, taking it in. “All I could do was listen,”
she says. “I was able to ask clarif ying questions or ask
for more information, but it was in the spirit of taking it
in, not r esponding or critiquing.”
Mary found the process revelatory . Other people
“almost have  a bird’s-eye view, and they can see your
life in ways you may not be able to, because you’re
involved in day-to-day living.” The participants praised
her communication and leadership skills, and urged her
to think broadly about how to translate them: “They
could see me working for a political campaign or writing
a children’s book.” (Mary is now a senior program oﬃcer
at a major foundation.)
The session focused on strengths, not weaknesses.
But Mary nonetheless picked up important clues  from
the conversation. “Ther e was a sense among people
that I was a highly creative person and should be doing
more in that space,” she says. “My interpr etation of that
is that I can be very intellectual, and maybe there
should be mor e of a balance with cr eativity .”
Perhaps the most startling insights were about her
personal life: “It was the ﬁrst time somebody said out
loud, ‘I want to see you with a child; I think you should
explor e it.’ Up until that point, I wasn’t sure I wanted to
have kids, but that comm ent made it more relevant for
me, and something I should be thinking about more
carefully .”
After the session, she sat down with her professional
coach and developed a six-month and yearlong plan
following up on the insights and advice she’d received,
from increasing her connections to other consultants to
doing more work locally . The focus group, says Mary,

“took me to the next level in terms of my professional
development. It helped me refocus my consulting
practice to include more training and developm ent,
which I loved doing and was really good at.” But the
most important change was personal. A year and a half
later, her daughter was bor n.
OceanofPDF .com

Your Online Presence
These days, a major part of your personal brand is online.
Sure, your friends and colleagues’ perceptions are based on
your day-to-day interactions, but if you have even minor
celebrity (you blog for an industry website) or you’r e job
hunting (and people are doing basic backgr ound checks),
the broader world is forming its image of you courtesy of
Facebook and Google. Your ﬁrst step? Review ing—and
contr olling—your online paper trail, because if you don’t do
it ﬁrst, it may come back to haunt you.
In fact, the New York Times  proﬁled a company called
Social Intelligence, which “scrapes the internet for
everything prospective employees may have said or done
online in the past seven years” and assembles a dossier on
the candidate.2 It has ferreted out racist remarks, drug
references, sexually explicit material, and weapons
fetishists. Hopefully that’s not your shtick. But even if you’r e
not a gunrun ner or trolling for OxyContin on Craigslist (like
one job candidate Socia l Intelligence reviewed), you still
may not be in the clear .
Your online presence may be spit-polished, with only your
wise quotations in industry journals and incisive blog posts
about the futur e of business. Then again, you may not
appear online exactly as you’d like to be perceived. Your
plight may be banal—you ’re a fanatical runner and the only
thing that comes up is your race times. It may be your
parents’ fault (if your name is Joe Smith, search engine
optimization is a cruel joke). It may be someone else’s fault
(one guy I know was plagued ﬁrst by sharing the same
name as a former MTV Asia VJ and later a congressman
forced to r esign due to a se x scandal).

But sometim es the pictur e that emer ges is downright
frightening, as was the case with a young woman I once met
with as a favor to a friend. She was obviously smart, just
ﬁnishing graduate school at an Ivy League university and
looking for a position in mark eting. We had a good  chat, but
at the end of the meeting, she leaned in and lower ed her
eyes. “Ther e’s something else I should mention,” she said.
“I’m not sure if you Googled me befor e we met, but . . .
there are some negative things being said about me online.”
It turns out she had a deranged ex-boyfriend who was
posting defamatory things about her online. Because of her
distinctive name, his rants littered any online search—and
made her life and job search very diﬃcult (she was pursuing
legal action). Of course, the fulminations of a jilted ex
shouldn’t be part of your personal brand. But thanks to the
internet, even the most private of matters can quickly
attach to your public persona.3
OceanofPDF .com

Don’t Stop at F acebook
Review everything, because companies like Social
Intelligence will. They report that less than a third of the
content they dredge up comes from major sites like
Facebook or Twitter . Instead, they trawl lesser-known
spaces, wher e it may feel “safer ” to post—and lead
candidates to mistak es. Comments on old blog posts,
bulletin boards, Craigslist ads, or old Yahoo! Groups archives
are all targets, not to mention photos and videos (which
may have been uploaded by friends with poorer judgment
than your own).
In addition to your ﬁrst pass, you may want to have
someone else review the data as well. Everyone knows a
pictur e of you with a bong is probably ill advised. But some
people might feel that membership in a “This Is America—I
Shouldn’t Have to Press 1 for English” Facebook group is
witty, while others could see it as racist. (Yes, that was a
real case vetted by Social Intelligence.) Getting another
perspective can help you discover blind spots and areas
wher e your idea of “just a joke” could be badly
misinterpr eted.
Try This
 
Search for yourself not just on Google, but also on other
search engines such as Bing and membership sites (that
may have various privacy settings) lik e Facebook.
Search for your name in quotation marks—as in “Dorie
Clark”—so you’ll only ﬁnd hits with that exact phrase.
(Otherwise, you may turn up any document, however
long, that happens to have both words in it.) Don’t

forget to search for variations of your name, including
common misspellings or nicknames.
Don’t give up too soon. Scroll through every page,
because you may ﬁnd a smoking gun on page twenty-
six of your Google search. If something malicious, false,
or inappr opriate is out there, someone’s going to ﬁnd it
eventually, and for your sak e, it better be you.
OceanofPDF .com

Seek Out Patterns in Past
Performance
You may also have access to hard data about how others
perceive you, namely, perfor mance reviews from your job
(or previous ones). Not every employer has its act together
enough to requir e formal sit-downs and evalua tions, so
don’t worry if it’s just not available. But especially  in larger
organizations, you’r e likely to have a paper trail. (If you’ve
applied to graduate programs or for speciﬁc fellowships, you
may also have access to recommendation letters others
have written for you, which are a treasur e trove of
intelligence.)
First, gather the material, and then take a step back.
You’re going to have opinions about everyone who’s written
a word about you. Mayb e your former boss claimed you
were fanatically detail- oriented, but you only acted that way
because she was so disor ganized; nothing would have
gotten done if you hadn’t  taken the reins. Maybe your grad
school professor criticized you for being late on a few
assignments, but didn’t take into account that your dad was
diagnosed with cancer that semester .
It’s natural to get defensive when you see yourself
evaluated on paper and attempt to justif y any criticisms. Try
not to. We’re not concer ned with one person’s hobbyhorse
issue (“Jeﬀ is a great employee, but he keeps confusing
‘there’ with ‘their’ in his memos!”). It’s when everyone (or
almost everyone) says your spelling, your micromanaging,
or your lateness is a problem that you should  take it
seriously, and do the same with your strengths. (Stein, the
former Radcliﬀe career counselor, observes that her clients

are often keenly awar e of their weaknesses, and ﬁnd it
much har der to appr eciate their positive attributes.)
OceanofPDF .com