



OceanofPDF .com

An imprint of Penguin Random House LLC
375 Hudson Street
New York, New York 10014
Copyright © 2017 by Olivia Fox Cabane and Judah Pollack
Penguin supports copyright. Copyright fuels creativity , encourages diverse voices, promotes free
speech, and creates a vibrant culture. Thank you for buying an authorized edition of this book and for
complying with copyright laws by not reproducing, scanning, or distributing any part of it in any
form without permission. You are supporting writers and allowing Penguin to continue to publish
books for every reader .
Most Portfolio books are available at a discount when purchased in quantity for sales promotions or
corporate use. Special editions, which include personalized covers, excerpts, and corporate imprints,
can be created when purchased in lar ge quantities. For more information, please call (212) 572-2232
or e-mail specialmarkets@penguinrandomhouse.com. Your local bookstore can also assist with
discounted bulk purchases using the Penguin Random House corporate Business-to-Business
program. For assistance in locating a participating retailer , e-mail B2B@penguinrandomhouse.com.
ISBN: 9781591847199 (hardcover)
ISBN: 9780698153448 (ebook)
ISBN: 9780735216778 (international edition)
While the author has made every ef fort to provide accurate telephone numbers, Internet addresses,
and other contact information at the time of publication, neither the publisher nor the author assumes
any responsibility for errors or for changes that occur after publication. Further , the publisher does
not have any control over and does not assume any responsibility for author or third-party Web sites
or their content.
Version_1
OceanofPDF .com

To Dr. Mar cus Raichle, discover er of the default mode network, whose
breakthr ough made our work possible, whose science underlies this entir e
book, and for whose guidance we ar e profoundly grateful.
OceanofPDF .com

Contents
Title Page
Copyright
Dedication
Introduction
Part One
The Butterflies
Chapter 1
The Four  Wings
Chapter 2
The Chrysalis
Chapter 3
On the Hunt
Chapter 4
The Butterfly Pr ocess
Chapter 5
Cultivating Your Garden
Chapter 6
What’ s in Your Net?

Part Two
The Blockers
Chapter 7
The Spiders of Fear
Chapter 8
The Failur e Wasps
Chapter 9
Icy Uncertainty
Chapter 10
The SuperT ools
Chapter  Summaries
Key Exer cises
Science Appendix
Recommended Resour ces
Acknowledgments
Notes
Index
OceanofPDF .com

I n t r o d u c t i o n
IN A SMALL  city in Switzerland on a fine spring day in 1905, a young patent
clerk left his one-year -old son and wife at home to go see his best friend
about a riddle. The two friends loved exchanging ideas, from philosophy to
physics, from art to electricity , and this morning our young patent clerk
wanted to discuss a problem that had been vexing him for some time.
For the past year , he’d been especially focused on a physics theory he’d
begun formulating ten years ago. He laid out every detail of the problem he
had been struggling with, and for an entire day the two friends analyzed
ideas and rehashed every aspect of the dilemma.
As the sun set, the young man finally concluded that the theory he’d
been working on for a decade was going nowhere. It had hit a brick wall.
Demoralized and dejected, he declared that he was giving up the entire
quest. And so Albert Einstein shuf fled home and went to sleep.
You can imagine his friend’ s surprise the next morning when,
answering an ur gent knock, he opened the door to see Einstein, who
bypassed polite greetings and blurted out, “Thank you. I’ve completely
solved the problem.” With that, he returned home and began to write.
Einstein spent the next six weeks writing out one of the most important
scientific contributions of all time: the special theory of relativity .1
What happened inside Einstein’ s brain that night? After years of ef fort,
why did the answer suddenly appear just when he had given up?
Einstein’ s experience was a classic example of the way our brain
creates breakthrough ideas, completely new and novel ways of solving
problems and looking at the world. And believe it or not, if you’ve ever had
a breakthrough, the exact same thing happened inside your brain, too.

This process was deliberately , consciously used by both Salvador Dali
and Thomas Edison. Dali would put his elbow on a table and rest his chin
on his upturned palm with a spoon between his chin and his palm. He
would let himself drift of f to sleep. As his muscles relaxed, the spoon would
drop and rattle against the table, waking him up. Dali would then sketch the
exact concept in his mind at that moment. Edison had a strikingly similar
habit of napping in his chair with a handful of marbles. The moment the
marbles’  clatter woke him up, he would write down whatever was in his
mind.2
For many , breakthroughs are like butterflies—beautiful and awe-
inspiring, yet erratic and elusive. Some people think they happen through
hard work and concentration. The harder you focus on the breakthrough
you’re seeking, the more likely you are to get it. Others think they are
spontaneous, inexplicable, and unpredictable. We describe these moments
of inspiration as “eureka” or “aha” moments, or we speak of “having a
lightbulb go of f.” They’re purely accidental, and there’ s no way to induce
them. Still others believe they are for the lucky and the extraordinary . The
truth is that we all can have breakthroughs.
In fact, breakthroughs are not accidental, they can be induced, and we
are going to show you how . Thanks to new neuroscience research, we now
know how the breakthrough process works and we have tools to access it.3
Breakthroughs, like butterflies, may fly an unpredictable path, but it is
possible to capture them if we build the right net.
Advances in neuroscience have revealed that these seemingly
unpredictable, sudden, and singular flashes are actually a predictable part of
an integrated mental process.4 Einstein described the breakthrough moment
as arriving “suddenly , and in a rather intuitive way . That means it is not
reached by conscious logical conclusions.”5 But this sudden flash of insight
is actually the only visible step of a much longer process, and Einstein
knew it. “Thinking it through afterwards, you can always discover the
reasons. . . . Intuition is nothing but the outcome of earlier intellectual
experience.”
Every single person on the planet has the ability to generate creative
breakthroughs inside their brains: you can’ t be born without it. We all have
a natural ability to create butterflies. However , you may not know how to

get the most out of it, or even how to access it. You need skills and practice
to build and wield a net.
Breakthrough thinkers impact the world, whether they’re Louis Pasteur ,
Steve Jobs, or Mahatma Gandhi. Breakthroughs advance science and
civilization. Breakthrough thinking gave us modern medicine, from Velcro6
to the pacemaker .7 The power of breakthrough thinking is equally valuable
at home: you could have a breakthrough about what’ s been holding you
back from getting into a relationship, or what you need to fix in your
marriage.
Breakthrough thinking is also critical in business: innovation
breakthroughs are worth millions, sometimes billions. Right now ,
companies are spending time and ef fort to create a culture of innovation
breakthroughs around their employees. But what about the inside of their
employees’  heads? As it turns out, even if your employees are surrounded
by an innovative or ganization or culture, if their mental  culture isn’ t
conducive, potential breakthroughs will never be realized.
Are you being asked to be far more creative at work than you signed on
for? Does your path forward in your career suddenly depend on your ability
to be innovative? Has breakthrough thinking become an expectation rather
than an aspiration? Whether you already have regular breakthroughs and
want to be able to direct them, or think that you just don’ t have that kind of
brain, we have good news: breakthrough thinking is a skill that you can
acquire and practice.
In the following pages, you are going to learn all about how your
brain’ s breakthrough process works, how to access it, what might be
holding it back, and how to turbochar ge it.
We do, however , want to be clear: we will not be giving you a magic
formula. Owning a net isn’ t sufficient to catch butterflies: you need
practice, patience, skill, and a little luck. Because the breakthrough
experience varies by individual, there is no guaranteed step-by-step
procedure. No one breakthrough looks exactly like any other; they all
emer ge through their own unique process. That’ s why the breakthrough
experience is not a directed, repeatable, linear one, but rather an evolving,
unfolding, creative process with many dif ferent elements.

What we are giving you is a framework and a set of tools to increase
the chances of breakthroughs. There’ s a common saying that “luck is
preparation meets opportunity .” In this book, you’ll learn how to prepare
yourself so you can make the most of the opportunities that present
themselves. We offer you tools and techniques from a broad range of
disciplines—from behavioral and cognitive psychology to neuroscience and
meditation, from peak performance athletic conditioning to Hollywood
Method acting. In this sense, breakthrough thinking is like mixed martial
arts, taking the most ef fective tools from anywhere, valuing ef fectiveness
over style. This book helps you put the science into practice so that you can
accelerate your learning curve.
We know that a person’ s breakthrough level can be increased with the
right methods because we’ve helped countless clients increase theirs in this
way. We’ve brought these breakthrough tools to the U.S. Army Special
Forces and to Stanford’ s Student Enterprise Accelerator , StartX, in the heart
of Silicon Valley .
Through these tools our clients have experienced breakthroughs in
areas as disparate as predicting the political outcome of the Arab Spring,
creating new medical technology devices, or breaking through executive
team deadlocks. They’ve reported astonishing results that have transformed
their practices, and you’ll find some of their stories in the pages that follow .
We have both been fascinated with breakthroughs for decades, and in
our pursuit of breakthroughs, we’ve tried some crazy stuf f. We’ve studied
sports psychology , Jungian archetypes, depth hypnosis, sensory deprivation,
cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT), mindfulness-based cognitive therapy
(MBCT), acceptance and commitment therapy (ACT), and an entire
alphabet soup of other acronym-worthy experiences. Just as we’ve passed
on the best insights and tools to our clients, we’re now giving them to you.
In this book, you’ll find unique knowledge drawn from a variety of
sciences and the techniques you need to apply this knowledge. Your life
will become your lab, and you’ll get infinite opportunities to experiment.
Becoming a breakthrough thinker does involve work—work that is
sometimes hard, uncomfortable, and confronting. But it’ s also incredibly
rewarding.
There is no substitute for doing the exercises in this book. Skimming
through them with the earnest intention of completing them “another day”

is not enough, nor is doing only the exercises that seem easy or interesting.
When an exercise asks you to close your eyes and imagine a scene, really
close your eyes and imagine. When we ask you to write out a scenario, grab
a pen and paper and write. If we ask you to do something, it’ s for a good
reason, and it will have a real impact on your level of breakthrough
thinking.
In part one, we’ll talk about what breakthroughs are (and aren’ t) and
look at the inner workings of your brain’ s breakthrough process. This is
where you’ll get to feel your breakthrough network in action, and learn to
tell the dif ference between the various modes your brain can switch into.
Then we’ll lay out the breakthrough experience for you. You’ll learn
how to get yourself into the right mental state and collect the facts, stories,
knowledge, and experiences needed to fuel your creative process.
You’ll learn how to turbochar ge your brain’ s breakthrough power by
increasing your level of neuroplasticity , using your brain’ s ability to
constantly rewire itself every time you think a new thought.
Putting It into Practice: A Thirty-Second Neuroplasticity Booster
Every time you think a new thought, all over your brain new structures are created. Yes, really .
Want to know what that feels like? Here you go.
Trace your route to work in your head. Be as specific as you can: imagine the signs, the
landmarks, the streetlights and traf fic signs. Imagine making the turns you would have to make,
the buildings, stores, or restaurants you would pass by .
That feeling of trying to assemble images in your mind, of or ganizing them in the right order ,
the slightly awkward feeling of doing something for the first time? That’ s neuroplasticity at work.
Your brain is physically creating new structures.
In part two, we’ll talk about your butterflies’  natural predators: the
forces that prevent breakthroughs from happening inside your mind. Did
you know that the three leading causes of butterfly demise are spiders,
wasps, and cold? They have equivalents inside your brain: the spiders of
fear, the wasps of failure, and the icy cold of uncertainty . Fear, failure, and
uncertainty are the breakthrough blockers that can trap your insights and
limit your potential. There are breakthroughs you could be having, right
now, that are trapped inside your mind, just waiting to be released. With the

right techniques, you can neutralize these negative forces and let your
butterflies soar . (If you can’ t wait to get started, jump straight to here.)
Finally , in the last chapter we’ll talk about the SuperT ools—tools that
will superchar ge all areas of your breakthrough process. And for the nerds
among you, we’ve included more information about the brain science of
breakthroughs in the Science Appendix.
By using the tools in this book, you will open the door to your brain’ s
ability to cut through the noise and see your brilliant breakthrough ideas.
These breakthroughs could change your business, your personal life, your
physical and emotional well-being, your learning agility , your perspective
on the world, your perception of yourself. Exponentially and incrementally ,
it could change anything or everything about you and who you are. To have
breakthroughs, you don’ t have to be special. You don’ t have to be brilliant.
You don’ t have to be privileged or even well educated. All you have to
know is what you’re looking for and how to find it.
OceanofPDF .com

Part One
The Butterflies
OceanofPDF .com

Chapter 1
                  
OceanofPDF .com

The Four Wings
All About Breakthroughs
YET  ANOTHER DROP  of ink leaked from his fountain pen onto the page, and
László Bíró threw down his pen in disgust. A Hungarian newspaper editor
who earned his salary by writing, he was frustrated with the tools of his
trade. He seemed to spend his time either filling up his fountain pens, or
cleaning up the smudges they made.1
Of course he was grateful for the invention of the fountain pen: it was a
vast improvement over feather quills. But it still meant ink splotches and
ruined pages that had to be written all over again.
Why couldn’ t the ink from his fountain be more like the ink used to
print his newspaper? Bíró already knew the answer: newspaper ink was
much too thick for his fountain pen. Right ink, wrong pen. Deciding to use
the newspaper ink was a good idea. But it wasn’ t a breakthrough.
The breakthrough came with a new way to deliver the ink. Rather than
trying to get the thick ink to flow through a nib, Bíró and his brother figured
out how to set a metal ball in a socket and let the thick ink roll out from
behind the ball.
Now let’ s be clear—ballpoint pens had been attempted before. They
just hadn’ t worked until then. Early ballpoints did not deliver the ink
evenly; overflow and clogging were just two of the many issues that made
them impractical. The breakthrough came when Bíró made the ballpoint
pen viable.
In business, a breakthrough is often described as an idea that solves a
problem or satisfies a need in an entirely new way . Although there is no
single definition of breakthroughs, we define them quite simply as the
moment when you break thr ough  something that was previously limiting
you, whether it’ s a specific problem you couldn’ t find a solution to, a
situation you couldn’ t understand, or simply an old way of doing or seeing
things.

Sociologist and author Martha Beck describes the experience of
breakthrough as “a shift in your understanding of the world, because the
lens through which you view the world has been suddenly , gloriously
changed. And boy , do breakthroughs feel amazing.”2 A breakthrough is a
sudden advance in your knowledge or understanding that moves you past a
barrier and makes you see things, understand things in a new way . Although
all breakthroughs come from the same process in the brain, not all
breakthroughs come in the same way .
There are two main kinds of breakthroughs: intentional and
unintentional. You’ll face some of the same obstacles with both, but these
obstacles will play out in dif ferent ways. Fear , for instance, impedes both
intentional and unintentional breakthroughs—but it rears its ugly head at
different stages of the breakthrough experience. For intentional
breakthroughs, fear interferes before the breakthrough, bringing up the
possibility of failure.
Fear seeps in after unintentional breakthroughs, and it centers on the
oncoming challenges of implementing a solution. For instance, you
suddenly realize (breakthrough) that you need a divorce. Anxiety might
arise as you foresee the unpleasantness that all too often accompanies the
process (implementation) of divorcing.
Or perhaps you suddenly realize (breakthrough) you’ve fallen in love
with a close friend. You could fear being rejected after making your new
feelings known (implementation), or , confusingly , fear success and the life
changes it would entail.
For unintentional breakthroughs, landing on a solution isn’ t the end
goal: you need to act on it. As Beck says, “Having breakthroughs isn’ t the
point. Living them is. Seeing in a new way is only the beginning.” Fear is a
powerful saboteur of this process.
Although all breakthroughs come from the same process in the brain,
not all breakthroughs come in the same way . We have identified four
different types: eureka breakthrough, metaphorical breakthrough, intuitive
breakthrough, and paradigm breakthrough. Understanding the dif ferent
kinds of breakthroughs will help you spot them so you don’ t miss a single
one. It will also help you discover the style, or styles, that are most natural
to you so you can learn to focus on the way that works best for you.

The key is to understand that no style of breakthrough is better or more
productive than another . It is simply best to understand which style or styles
come most naturally to you.
Eureka Br eakthr ough
Eureka translates from the Greek as “I’ve got it” or “That’ s it.” In popular
culture, it has come to describe the moment when someone experiences a
sudden, unexpected realization.
Archimedes, the original “Eureka!” shouter , was a Greek
mathematician and scientist living in ancient Sicily in the third century B.C.
One day , he was asked by King Hiero, ruler of the city-state, to determine
whether a crown was made of real gold. Since gold had a known density , all
he had to do was measure the density of the crown and see whether it
matched up.
The first part of measuring density was easy: determine the crown’ s
weight. But the second part required measuring the crown’ s exact volume.
Now , measuring the volume of an object like a cube is simple. But how do
you determine the volume of an object as irregularly shaped as a crown?
Archimedes puzzled on the problem until one day while taking a bath.
As he stepped into the bathtub, he watched the water rise, displaced by his
leg. He realized that, just as the water had risen to accommodate the new
volume of his leg, it would rise in response to the volume of the crown. So
he could submer ge the crown and measure the amount of water displaced to
know the crown’ s volume, and thus calculate its density . He cried “Eureka!”
and jumped out of his bath and ran through the streets of Syracuse stark
naked, shouting all the way .
We tend to have eureka insights when we’ve been mulling over a
problem for some time. Take, for example, the time two helicopter
mechanics in the Army Reserve saved the army tens of millions of dollars
because of their shared love of NASCAR.3
During the Iraq War, desert sand and dust were damaging helicopter
windshields faster than the army could replace them, and costing hundreds
of thousands of dollars every month. Lexan, the shatter -resistant plastic the
windshields were made of, tended to scratch easily .

As it happens, Lexan is also used to make NASCAR windshields. But
to solve the scratching problem, NASCAR drivers had learned to cover
their windshields with thin sheets of transparent Mylar film they called
“tearaways.” At the end of each race, the used Mylar sheet is torn of f, and
the Lexan windshield underneath is left without a scratch.
Two national guardsmen on a helicopter maintenance crew in Virginia
happened to be big NASCAR fans. As they surveyed the extent of the
damage done to their helicopters’  Lexan windshields, they were hit with the
possibility that NASCAR’ s solution could solve the army’ s problem.
Creatively reapplying an existing solution is a common type of eureka
insight. In fact, NASCAR first borrowed the Mylar technique from
motorcycle racers protecting their helmets.
When eureka breakthroughs happen, they happen fast. They are the
proverbial lightning bolt over the head. Many people report the sensation of
receiving information from a location “above.” And this sudden discovery
of an immediately applicable solution is incredibly exciting.
Eureka insights are the ones that your author Olivia gets most often
(she’ s ruthlessly pragmatic). These ideas arrive with a clear mental picture
of how to execute them and the confidence that they’ll work.
They are most likely to come when you have been living with a
problem or a block. This problem is interfering with your peace of mind;
you think about it often during the day . But the actual breakthrough will
most likely occur when you’re no longer thinking about the problem.
James Watt did not invent the steam engine.4 In 1764, at the University
of Glasgow , he was repairing what was known as a Newcomen steam
engine, which Watt considered very inef ficient. He worked on the problem
until one spring day in 1765, he was walking through a park when the
breakthrough came to him: he needed two cylinders.5 Eureka! Watt’s
breakthrough made the engine so much more powerful and ef ficient that it
ushered in the true age of steam.
A century later , the next great breakthrough in power occurred in a
remarkably similar way . Nikola Tesla had been working on the concept of
an alternating current motor for a few years. One day while walking
through a park in Budapest he had a feverish vision of an alternating current

motor complete with three slightly out of phase magnetic fields turning the
drive shaft.6 The solution had appeared fully formed. Eureka!
This is part of the grand paradox of breakthrough thinking. In order to
have a eureka breakthrough, you have to be deeply immersed in a problem.
But then you have to let go of it, let your mind wander of f and go do
something else. It’ s while you’re otherwise engaged, and not focused on the
problem, that you will be rewarded with a eureka breakthrough. How to
switch between these two modes—focus and lack of focus—is one of the
most important things this book will teach you.
“In my experience, eureka moments happen when we face a high level
of pressure,” explains Victoria Spadaro-Grant, CT O of pasta behemoth
Barilla and one of Olivia’ s favorite clients, “whether the pressure is
generated as a by-product of a self-imposed challenge or the result of
external circumstances.”7
When Barilla CEO Claudio Colzani, concerned by the increasing
consumption of saturated fats reported by the World Health Or ganization,
ordered a massive reduction in saturated fats across Barilla’ s entire bakery
portfolio, Spadaro-Grant faced a “massive challenge.” As head of Research
and Development for the Barilla Group, she was in char ge of reformulating
the portfolio and bringing it to market within five months. “At the time, we
did not know how to solve the technical challenge of delivering the same
eating experience with less saturated fat, not to mention implementing new
manufacturing processes and addressing the multimillion euro cost and
profitability impact.”
With the clock ticking, Spadaro-Grant assembled “a SW AT team of
only six people who were eager to try , test, break rules, and make bold
decisions. We realized that with such a short time frame, we had to throw
the old rule book completely out the window . That realization led to new
margins of tolerance across technical solutions, manufacturing setups,
formulation costs, and marketing communications. As simple as this
sounds, this was the way we changed technical paradigms about how to use
fats in our bakery .” Eureka!

Metaphorical Br eakthr ough
In 1782, there was no such thing as a bullet: guns did not shoot small,
tapered missiles, but rather lumps of lead known as “shot.“ Most people
produced shot by rolling out a sheet of molten lead, waiting for it to cool,
and then chopping it up. This wasn’ t very ef fective in producing smooth
spheres: the projectiles were misshapen, pitted, or even completely
perforated.
As a result, it was nearly impossible for anyone to shoot straight.
Because of their irregular shape, the slugs would catch the wind and curve
like a paper airplane; their trajectory was always unpredictable. In 1782,
hitting your tar get had more to do with luck than with aim. Since England
was in the business of ruling the world at the time, and in the midst of a war
with its pesky American colonies, the ability to shoot straight was of great
interest.
Producing shot was also expensive, time consuming, and labor
intensive. After the chopping method, people tried pouring molten lead into
spherical molds. Unfortunately , the cooling process tended to create of f-
center spheres, and in addition air bubbles left deep, random pits.
Enter William Watts. A prosperous plumber living in a three-story
house in the town of Bristol, England, Watts experienced a week of
particularly troublesome sleep. Night after night he was puzzled by the
same dream: He was walking along a street when it began to rain—only it
wasn’ t raining water , it was raining lead. The drops of lead piled up around
his feet. When Watts bent down to pick one up, he saw that it was a
perfectly round sphere, the ideal lead shot everyone was chasing after . Watts
was dreaming about the perfect product falling from the sky . But what did it
mean? Day after day he pondered that question in vain.8
After a few days, tired from lack of sleep at night and from puzzling
over the dream during the day , Watts went for a walk. As he went down the
street he had a flash of insight and suddenly understood the meaning of his
dream. He ran home and set to work.
Watts added three floors to his house, making it six stories high. He cut
holes in each floor , one atop the other , and put a water tank at the bottom.
Then he stood at the top of this shaft with a copper sieve and a bucket of
molten lead. He poured the liquid lead through the sieve and watched as

lead droplets fell the length of the shaft, landing in the cool water below
with a hiss.
He ran downstairs, dipped his hand into the well, and pulled up a
handful of beautifully round lead shot. The even pull of gravity in the
stillness of the airshaft had produced perfect spheres. Watts had invented a
process to make it rain bullets, turning his dream into reality . Patented in
1783, these “shot towers,” as they came to be known, sprang up all over
England, Europe, and America.
Watts’s mind had presented him with a solution indirectly: his brain
came up with an analogy and shared it through a dream. Watts dreamed that
he was walking in a rain of little lead pellets, had the same dream for a
week without knowing what to make of it, then finally had a revelation, and
the insight that his mind was trying to communicate became clear .
Metaphorical insights aren’ t as direct as eureka insights. Answers come
to you first as metaphors or analogies, and you must interpret their images
before the breakthrough is complete. With Archimedes’  eureka insight, the
answer came fully formed. There was no need to interpret a metaphor: the
submersion of his leg was a direct correlation to the submersion of the
crown.
If Watts’s insight had been a eureka insight, he would have seen a
concrete solution: an image of a tower , of drops of metal falling and being
shaped into spheres by friction with the air , landing in water , and cooling
down. It would have been a one-to-one correlation. Instead, he had a dream
about rain, and then saw that the drops of rain were drops of lead. It was
raining lead. The elements were there: the lead, the fall, the water . But there
wasn’ t a direct correlation; a process of interpretation was necessary .
Sometimes, your brain needs to work through various levels of
comprehension before you can connect a wordless intuition to a real-life
problem. Metaphor works like a wormhole: it can connect things that
appear to be incredibly far apart, and it can overlay a pattern on things that
appear to be unconnected. Unlike their eureka cousins, metaphorical
breakthroughs can be had about subjects we’re barely familiar with, like a
plumber having an insight about ammunition.
Such insights are often embedded in bizarre dreams. Celebrated
inventor Elias Howe dreamed that he was captured by a primitive tribe and
held at spear point. Howe, admirably unperturbed in his dream, noticed that

the spearheads had holes in them. Thus was discovered the secret to the
lock stitch sewing machine—placing a hole on the pointy end of the needle.
The improvement in stitching speed revolutionized the clothing industry .9
This metaphoric type of insight is also the basis of a process known as
biomimicry . In biomimicry , we look for designs already existing in nature
that could be useful in a human context. You may have heard that Velcro
was discovered by mimicking sticky burrs. But did you know that the
tenacious, watertight glue that oysters and barnacles use to adhere to rocks
has inspired new ways for sur geons to close wounds on human beings?10
The Wright Brothers originally studied the flight of birds to gain
insights into how to control powered flight. They noticed the birds twisted
their wing tips to keep their balance. But on their lightweight plane,
pivoting wing tips would be too fragile. Wilbur Wright, who owned a
bicycle shop, had a long inner -tube box in his hands one day . He was
absentmindedly twisting the box when the breakthrough suddenly came to
him. If the entire wing twisted, you could control flight. His discovery came
to be called “wing warping” and was the breakthrough that set the age of
aviation in motion.11
We have found metaphorical breakthroughs to be a powerful tool when working with
leaders. The executive team of a very successful Silicon Valley company asked us to sit in
on their meeting when they were facing a block. They had had great success with their core
product but could feel their well-funded competitors breathing down their neck. Should
they double down on what they were already doing and try to own the market, or should
they expand into a more unknown, adjacent area?
The executive team talked and talked. They used logic and linear ar guments and lots
and lots of words. Some ar gued they should stay with what they know . Their investors
trusted them, their customers trusted them, and they’d spent a lot of time and money
building their brand in that direction. Others ar gued that this was innovate-or -die time, that
they had no choice but to spread their wings and fly into the unknown. That’ s what made
companies great. There was a not-so-subtle hint that the other side lacked the courage to be
great. That did not go over well. Those ar guing to stick with the known product dug in and
made their same ar guments only more forcefully . Around and around they went, all the time
banging up against walls.
Judah went up to the big whiteboard in the front of the room and drew two lar ge boxes.
He then split the executive team into their opposing groups, gave them pens, and ordered
them to draw pictures of their visions of the future. At first there was grumbling and
protests that they didn’ t know how to draw . Olivia assured them that stick figures were
perfectly acceptable. Slowly , the teams began to work.

When the executives finished there was something striking about their two pictures:
they weren’ t very dif ferent. Both groups drew a road winding to the horizon, happy faces
along the road, and signposts at certain intervals. The farther along the roads you went the
more happy faces there were. At first everyone was confused. If their pictures were so
similar , why were they ar guing?
As each team described their drawings the dif ferences became crystal clear . One group
drew bends in the road to represent how they’d have to react to the market. The other group
drew bends in the road to represent how they wanted to get ahead  of the market. The room
got quiet for moment. A clarity had emer ged. In this case the metaphor broke through the
disagreement and posturing to reveal the essence of the issue. The group that wanted to
stick with the core product and then react to the market saw clearly that they were reacting
out of fear . The decision was made to move into the adjacent field. Three years on and the
decision has proved a rousing success.
Visual thinking is a common trait among breakthrough thinkers. Many of the people we
interviewed carry small sketch pads with them at all times. When they first put their idea to
paper it is often as an image or a series of images. Visual thinking accesses dif ferent parts
of the brain than language and logical ar gument. And it can be even more powerful when
you are not very good at drawing because it forces you to be less literal and more
metaphorical.
Intuitive Br eakthr ough
Imagine a dry lake bed in the high desert of California. This vast wasteland,
offering little more than hard red earth, dust, and heat, was the spot the
miltary had chosen in 1947 for its top-secret supersonic test flights. The
plane being tested, the Bell X-1, was shaped like a bullet, with wafer -thin
wings. The U.S. Air Force was experimenting with rocket planes to finally
crack the sound barrier .
Unfortunately , every time pilots got close to the speed of sound, their
planes’  controls would freeze up, their rudders wouldn’ t move, and they’d
be tossed around as if flying through a storm. It wasn’ t pretty: one plane
completely disintegrated. The engineers were wringing their hands. No pilot
had yet survived flying even 85 percent of the necessary speed, and the
death toll was mounting.12
Chuck Yeager , a country boy from West Virginia, was one of the air
force’ s very best pilots. At barely twenty-four years old, Yeager was already
a legend. Thanks to his World War II exploits, he was known as an ace
fighter pilot who seemed to have been born to fly .

During practice runs, Yeager had experienced all the usual dif ficulties
as he approached the speed of sound: loss of controls, the plane shaking and
wobbling, the entire aircraft tossed around in the wind like a rag doll. And
yet, despite this evidence, Yeager was convinced that the closer he got to
the sound barrier , the easier flying would be.
How could he be so sure? Aerospace engineering barely had a name
yet, and he was up against PhDs who safely combined liquid oxygen,
cooled to 297 degrees below zero, with ethyl alcohol, and then managed to
contain the resulting explosion in a way that created propulsion. They were
certain that they had run up against the limits of physics, and that flirting
with the sound barrier was a suicide mission.
Yet here was Yeager , the son of a gas driller , with only a high school
education, certain that he could make it. He had nothing but an intuition, a
hunch so strong he was willing to bet his life on it. He somehow knew  it
would work.
On the fateful morning of October 14, 1947, Chuck Yeager climbed
aboard the Bell X-1 and slid into the cockpit. He and his plane were
dropped out of the belly of a converted B-29 bomber and rocketed straight
up into the sky .
As he approached .9 Mach (90 percent of the necessary speed), the
plane tossed and rolled and the controls became unresponsive. But when he
reached .96 Mach he informed the ground that he had regained control of
the airplane. The country boy had out-predicted the PhDs.
And then all of a sudden, the needle on the machometer fluctuated, then
abruptly jumped clear of f the scale. On the ground, they heard the famous
“sonic boom.” Not only had the plane gotten easier to fly , once it got close
enough, the plane simply leapt across the sound barrier .
How did Yeager know? And how was he sure enough to risk his life?
Intuitive breakthroughs defy logic or explanation. Most of the time, when
people experience intuitive breakthroughs they don’ t know why their
solution will work, they just know that it will.
Achieving a certain level of mastery in one’ s line of work or craft opens
the door to deep insights. Research fellow Tammy Sanders describes
intuition as “a nebulous and inexplicable sense of knowing, flowing from
expertise and guided by environmental cues.”13 This is the kind of insight

that comes to tinkerers, model builders, and product designers. Without
even realizing it, you’ve loaded up thousands of facts, experiences, and case
studies over the course of your life, and they’re sitting in the back of your
mind.
Thomas Edison, the ultimate tinkerer , invented the phonograph with an
intuitive breakthrough. As he tinkered with a prototelephone, on a whim, he
touched a pinpoint to the vibrating diaphragm he was working with. He had
an intuition that, as he spoke, the pinpoint would create indentations in the
tinfoil beneath the diaphragm. When the pinpoint played back through the
track in the tinfoil, it would vibrate the pin, reproducing the sound. He was
right.14
Although both eureka and intuitive breakthroughs are characterized by
a sense of certainty , there is a finality to a eureka breakthrough; you’ve
arrived at your goal. Intuitive breakthroughs, on the other hand, tend to be
more of a beginning; they set you on the path toward the goal. Don’ t expect
a sudden flash of insight. You will, however , experience a quiet calming of
the mind and body . It’s as though you were standing at a crossroads and
suddenly just knew to take the road on the left.
If you’re scratching your head, thinking that intuitive breakthroughs
don’t sound like breakthroughs at all, they’re probably not your personal
style of breakthrough. If, on the other hand, you read this section and felt
truly understood, this might be your native breakthrough style.
Do you have to be more confident to handle an intuitive insight than a
eureka insight? Yes. You have to ascribe legitimacy to a feeling you can’ t
explain, rationalize, or prove.
Leaders must communicate their intuitive breakthroughs clearly and concretely to gain
appropriate support in their or ganizations. But intuition can be dif ficult to talk about.
Two-star general Dana Pittard was the commanding of ficer of the army’ s 1st Armored
Division at Fort Bliss in El Paso, Texas. He was in char ge of forty thousand people and a
massive amount of firepower . So it was odd for Judah, when working with the general and
his staf f, to hear whispers about the general planting “Charlie Brown Christmas trees” all
over the post. Going on his own intuition, Judah asked about the Christmas trees.
After an awkward silence, the general explained that one of his goals was to make Fort
Bliss, an army post lar ger than the state of Rhode Island in the desert of west Texas, a zero-
waste facility . Planting trees for soil and water retention as well as shade was part of that
mission. It was at this point that the chief of operations said, “Sir , they just look sad along
the side of the road. Like rows and rows of Charlie Brown Christmas trees.”

Judah asked the general what he saw when he looked at the rows of sad little trees along
the road. The general stared of f for a few moments. And then it was as if he realized that no
one else was seeing what he was seeing. He understood he needed to communicate his
intuition.
“I see those trees thirty years in the future. They’re spreading their leaves wide across
the boulevards providing shade; their thick roots are traveling deep into the ground. Birds
and squirrels are making their homes in the branches. As the leaves give of f their moisture
they cool the sidewalks so more people will walk.”
As the general described the post of the future, his staf f nodded their heads. But they
still were not bought in. Judah could tell from the combination of the general’ s conviction,
yet still vague description, that he had had an intuitive breakthrough. He knew something
about the future that went beyond his environmental concern; he just couldn’ t quite
communicate what it was. That’ s the paradox of intuitive breakthroughs. There was
something more to the general’ s vision than a description of trees. But what was it?
When the group reconvened, Judah asked General Pittard why he was focused on
making Fort Bliss a zero-waste post. The general grew very animated. “That’ s just it. Our
military runs on ener gy, and right now that ener gy comes from oil. That dependence is a
security risk, both from other countries and the environment. Don’ t you see,” he said to his
staff, “it’ s not about the trees. We could have a more peaceful world, a more secure world
in thirty years, by changing how we draw ener gy from the world. The trees are just a first
step we can take right now in that direction.”
General Pittard was trying to help the military see the inevitability and intelligence of
going green. It was an intuitive idea. We may not know if it worked for another thirty years.
But his explanation helped his staf f understand what his intuition was about (though the
Charlie Brown moniker stuck).
Remember , no one style of breakthrough is better than another . Some
people experience breakthroughs across multiple styles, and others have a
deep relationship with just one. The key is to know which one or two are
yours, and to work to cultivate those.
Paradigm Br eakthr ough
The names associated with paradigm breakthrough are legendary: Newton,
Einstein, Heisenber g, Darwin. This is the kind of breakthrough that af fects
all of humanity and changes the way we see the world.
Paradigm breakthrough is a deep insight about a system of thought that
fundamentally changes the rules we assign to that system. When Newton
watched an apple fall to the ground and realized that the same force that
pulled the apple down was also governing the heavenly bodies, he
revolutionized a system.

While eureka breakthroughs and paradigm breakthroughs both tend to
arrive in a clear , straightforward fashion, they dif fer in the type of content
they deliver . Paradigm breakthroughs will reveal a grand theory , universal
laws, an explanation of multiple phenomena without any immediate
concrete application. Eureka breakthroughs, on the other hand, deliver a
concrete, immediately applicable answer to a specific problem.
You’ll also feel dif ferent, physically and mentally , after experiencing
these two types of breakthroughs. Eureka breakthroughs deliver a rush of
excitement and newfound ener gy. We heard a story about a scientist who
was driving of f the NASA  campus at the end of the day when a thorny
problem suddenly resolved itself—a eureka breakthrough. He stopped his
car in the middle of the road, got out, and ran back to his of fice.
For the rest of the afternoon, his fellow NASA  employees simply drove
around his car on their way out, swerving extra wide to avoid the driver ’s
side door , which he had left open. Even if you’re a generally responsible
person, having a eureka breakthrough will bring out the absentminded
professor in you.
Paradigm breakthroughs, although far greater in their impact, are a
calmer personal experience. They may bring about a sense of awe and
wonder rather than excitement. They might be immensely intellectually
satisfying, but not necessarily valuable in the financial or practical sense.
And they often require additional work to be fully developed, as in the case
of Einstein’ s theory of relativity , which was too complex to have “occurred”
to him in its entirety in one moment. Einstein actually spent six whole
weeks writing out his theory . The experience was more drawn out than we
typically think necessary for breakthroughs, as if the magnitude of the idea
was too much to take in all at once.
Paradigm breakthroughs are the most rarely occurring type, and the
most powerful. But they have as much to do with luck and timing as they
have to do with a single person’ s abilities. Einstein’ s paradigm
breakthrough came at the end of a long line of smaller breakthroughs going
back at least a hundred years, from Alessandro Volta’s discovery and
description of electrical properties to James Clerk Maxwell’ s more precise
definition of these properties to Albert Michelson and Edward Morley
disproving the existence of aether and more accurately confirming the

speed of light, to Ludwig Boltzmann defending the concept of atoms, and
finally to Max Planck discovering the law of quanta.
Every single one of these discoveries, these smaller breakthroughs, was
a prerequisite for Einstein’ s paradigm breakthrough. This series of
breakthroughs is what Einstein was describing when speaking of his
“earlier intellectual experience.”15 Einstein lived at a moment in history
ripe for a paradigm shift. He truly “stood on the shoulders of giants.”
This is not to take away from Einstein’ s genius, but it’ s important to
recognize the role of external factors in creating a paradigm breakthrough.
And while they may seem like the Holy Grail of breakthroughs, it’ s
something one should neither focus on nor strive after .
The allure of the paradigm breakthrough is obvious. Everyone will
know your name. Your face will adorn the walls of dorm rooms. But
paradigm shifters don’ t set out to shift paradigms—a lesson many
innovators would do well to learn.
Many people get lost down a rabbit hole chasing a paradigm-shifting
idea. NASA  scientist Peter Cheeseman talks about seeing colleagues go
chasing after the essence of quantum mechanics and never returning.
Artificial intelligence expert, serial entrepreneur , and angel investor Barney
Pell calls the phenomenon “smart people, stupid problem.”16 Olivia’ s
scientist father recalls: “For the first ten years after my PhD, I was chasing
the Nobel Prize and got nowhere. Then I gave up, and finally started doing
good science.”
Once again, it’ s important to see the dif ferent types of breakthroughs as
equally desirable, and you must trust the way your brain delivers a
breakthrough to you.
KEY  TAKEA WAYS
A breakthrough is a sudden advance in our knowledge or
understanding that moves us past a barrier and allows us to see and
understand something in a new way .
Eureka breakthroughs are clear , sudden, fully formed, immediately
applicable, and are most likely to arrive when you’re not thinking
about a problem. They create great excitement in the individual
experiencing one.

Metaphorical breakthroughs usually arrive as metaphors or
analogies and require interpretation before they’re complete. They
are sometimes embedded in dreams, and occur as the brain connects
two seemingly disparate items or ideas.
Intuitive breakthroughs defy logic and explanation and tend to be
more of a beginning. They allow us to make progress down a longer
path.
Paradigm breakthroughs arrive in clear , straightforward fashion,
similar to eureka breakthroughs. However , these breakthroughs
reveal a grand theory or explanation that is without any immediate
application. They bring more awe and wonder than excitement.
They are the rarest, but also the most powerful, type of
breakthrough.
No specific type of breakthrough is better or more productive than
another , it’s simply a matter of knowing which type is most natural
to you.
OceanofPDF .com

Chapter 2
                  
OceanofPDF .com

The Chrysalis
Where Breakthroughs Come From
THE YEAR WAS 1965. The place was Clearwater , Florida. In his motel room—
the Rolling Stones weren’ t yet famous enough to af ford hotels—Keith
Richards woke up on a hot, humid morning to find his guitar and a tape
recorder on the bed beside him. Groggy and hung over , Richards rewound
the tape and pressed “play .” The hourlong tape contained fifty-nine minutes
of his own snoring. But the first thirty seconds held the opening bars and
first lyric of what became the Rolling Stones’ s most iconic hit, the song
“Satisfaction.”1 He didn’ t remember even touching the tape recorder .
Believe it or not, Richards’ s breakthrough moment follows the very
same pattern as Einstein’ s discovery of the special theory of relativity . It’s
the pattern we heard again and again when we interviewed some of the
world’ s greatest innovators for this book. And it’ s the same pattern you’ve
experienced if you’ve ever had a sudden epiphany in the shower .
Whenever you have a “shower moment,” chances are something was on
your mind, like a problem at work or an issue in a relationship. You’d
probably been mulling over the problem, trying to work it out in dif ferent
ways. Then you stepped into the shower . Your mind wandered of f as the
water poured over you. You were no longer focused. Suddenly , seemingly
out of the blue, the answer came to you.
What do your shower moments have in common with both Keith
Richards’ s and Albert Einstein’ s discoveries? When you got into the
shower , you unknowingly switched brain modes. Previously , you had been
consciously focusing on the problem. But in the shower , your mind was
probably drifting, idly daydreaming or seemingly “thinking about nothing.”
Neuroscientists have recently discovered that the secret to breakthroughs
lies in our ability to switch between these two modes, the focused and the
meandering.2

The focused mode is one you are already familiar with, because it’ s the
one you have been consciously using all your life. You can think of this
mode as the “executive mode”: it’ s the one you use to execute, to get things
done. Goal oriented and deadline focused, it’ s a champion at making lists,
following timelines, and coming in under budget. The part of your brain
responsible for this mode is called the executive network,  or EN.3
The EN is a group of brain regions near the front of your skull that help
you focus on a task and accomplish a specific goal. You’re very well versed
in the use of your EN. You did, after all, spend at least a decade in school
specifically training those brain regions. As a matter of fact, you’re using
your EN right now to read this sentence.
The EN allowed our forebears to track the patterns of the stars and the
moon, figure out the best time to plant their crops, and or ganize the
immense task of building the pyramids. It’ s also responsible for “social
inhibition,” the form of self-control we use to function in society . Without
your EN you are a three-year -old. With your EN you are (we hope) a
functional, responsible, and productive member of society .
But your EN alone can’ t create breakthroughs. It needs help from the
more meandering network, the one that creates shower moments. This is
our creative network, the default network,  or DN. You can think of the DN
as a network or council of breakthrough geniuses inside your brain. The
geniuses talk and exchange ideas, half-baked theories, and wild
speculations.
The DN is the source of all our creativity , all our invention, all our
genius—and it hasn’ t gotten nearly enough recognition. What has the DN
accomplished throughout history? A better question would be what great
discoveries hasn’ t it played a role in. If the EN gives us the ability to focus
and accomplish a task, the DN gives us the ability to look through the
complexity of the world to see the patterns underneath.4
The DN is a vital component of your brain: research has made clear that
this part of your brain is as essential to your survival as your heart or your
kidneys.5 It’s so important, in fact, that we could have written this entire
book all about the DN. We would have said, “Here it is! Here’ s how it
works, here’ s how you can access it, here’ s how you can turbochar ge it.”
But in fact, that’ s not enough. The DN, alone, can’ t create breakthroughs.

It’s the ability to use both modes, to switch from one mode to another , that enabled Keith
Richards to come up with “Satisfaction” and Albert Einstein to discover the special theory
of relativity . In fact, it’ s what enabled most discoveries in human history .
We will cover how the DN works, how you can access it, and how you
can turbochar ge it. But we will then take you to the next level and teach you
how to get both networks to work together—that is, how to switch from one
mode to the other and back again. This “mode switching” is what it’ s all
about .
As your brain takes in information via your five senses, some of it is
used in immediate circumstances, such as: step over that rock; hit the
brakes; someone just walked into the room, so stop singing.
We also use information to build patterns. Some of the patterns are
simple, such as: I like pizza from Marcello’ s, or I don’ t like it when my
mother calls because she gives me guilt for not calling. These patterns are
part of life’ s basics, its essentials. (Especially with a Jewish mother . Trust
us.)
Other patterns are more complex, such as: What is the series of notes,
chords, and bars that will become a song that will electrify American rock
and roll? Try as it might, this was not a pattern that Richards’ s EN could
figure out.
In 1965, on their first American tour , the Rolling Stones were a
midlevel group touring the country with their fourth album. They were
seriously in need of a breakthrough hit, the kind of number one song that
would make them a household name. Richards’ s EN knew this and had
been focusing on it. His executive set a direction and defined a need, but it
couldn’ t come up with a solution.
When Richards fell asleep, his executive was able to take a break from
its usual work of thinking and executing. Imagine it taking a walk from its
front of fice in the brain to the deeper , central part of the brain. There’ s a
secret lounge there, where his council of breakthrough geniuses reside. We
all have a lounge like that inside our brain.
While Richards’ s executive was working in the brain’ s front of fice, the
lights in the genius lounge were dim, because when the EN is focused on
accomplishing a specific task, it draws much of the brain’ s power . But with

the front of fice on break, the power is rerouted to the genius lounge, and
when Richards’ s executive opens the door , things are buzzing.
Imagine a lounge full of plush couches, beanbags, drinks and snacks,
whiteboards and sticky notes and dif ferent colored pens and pencils.
Leonardo da Vinci is sitting in a corner doodling on his sketch pad.
Napoleon is playing with toy soldiers. Euclid is dancing with glow sticks
that Marie Curie gave him. Michelangelo is wrapping Play-Doh around a
pencil. Teresa de Avila is trying to write in her diary , but Erasmus keeps
bothering her to ask about the fate of mankind. Steve Jobs is telling Einstein
he’s not thinking big enough. Sun Tzu is telling a story of his past victory to
no one in particular . Joan of Arc is ruminating over her betrayal by the
French. Sherlock Holmes is analyzing the environment for clues (T o what?
It doesn’ t matter . He just likes analyzing), and Amelia Earhart is taking a
nap.
When it walks into the room, Richards’ s executive asks for their
attention. “Listen folks, we need a hit. See what you can come up with.” A
direction is set, a need is defined. Then—and this is important—the
executive heads out to do something else. It knows that it has to let the
geniuses do their thing. Maybe it takes a walk, knits a sock, or takes a
shower . It can’ t be something too demanding, or it would draw brainpower
away from the lounge.
Meanwhile, back in the lounge, the lights grow bright and the geniuses
crank up the espresso machine. They are talking, writing, drawing, building
Lego models of their theories, or putting sticky notes up and moving them
around. Michelangelo and Leonardo are sketching, Sun Tzu and Napoleon
are strategizing, Teresa de Avila and Erasmus are reflecting, Joan of Arc is
worrying. (W e’re not kidding, this is really what the dif ferent parts of your
DN do.) The ideas are flying. One theory leads to another , which leads to
another .
The executive regularly checks back in so that the geniuses can show it
what they came up with. The executive might make some comments and
suggestions or clarify the direction, and then go back to its crossword
puzzle or daydream. Until one moment—during a walk, or in the shower , or
in Richards’ s case, in the middle of the night—when the geniuses get
incredibly excited, and the executive sees something spark. Something has
come together .

That night in Clearwater , Keith Richards’ s genius council showed his
executive the first eight bars of a song with a single lyric. The geniuses and
the executive looked at it together , then looked at each other and said Y es!
The executive woke Richards up, made sure he recorded it, and then went
off-task again so Richards could go back to sleep.
And that, in a nutshell, is the neuroscience of breakthroughs.
Recapping the neur oscience of “Satisfaction”:
The executive sets the direction: Write a hit song!
Richards falls asleep; his executive leaves the front of fice.
Power reroutes to the genius lounge; the brain has switched modes. *
The geniuses come up with a song that the executive recognizes as a possible
hit.
The executive rouses Richards from sleep and makes sure he records the song.
Task completed, Richards falls back asleep as his executive leaves the front
office.
The executive, among many other things, sets the direction for your
genius council to follow . And once the genius council has come up with
something, the executive is the one that puts into practice the ideas the
genius council comes up with. It’ s as if the executive were giving the genius
council a bunch of Legos and saying, “See what you can turn these into.”
The Legos snap together the same way neurons do. Your genius council is
constantly trying out new neural connections. Sometimes it makes a
multicolored Lego mess, but sometimes it puts together a locomotive, a
spaceship, or the special theory of relativity .
If the DN Is So Important, Why Haven’t You Heard of It
Befor e?
Since 1929, neuroscientists have known that the brain is in a constant state
of activity , and that background noise surrounds our more rational

processes, but only recently has that background noise been examined as
anything more than a nuisance.6
Our modern biases are geared toward the logical, the structured, the
efficient—all the things that the DN is not. As the DN’ s discoverer , Dr.
Marcus Raichle, told us, “Up until recently , our focus has been on making
the brain do specific things, ignoring the background, default,
nonconscious, nondirected activity .”7 The default network is one of the
most powerful tools at our disposal, but it is not task focused.
Focus is a positive attribute: a bias for the executive is a bias for what is
feasible. But the top performers, the stars, the innovators, the geniuses reach
breakthroughs by switching back and forth between the focused EN and the
unfocused DN.
Dr. Raichle, who discovered the existence of the default network in
1997, named it thus because it is the mode that the brain defaults  to anytime
it isn’ t on-task. And this mode never actually shuts of f, but rather quiets
down when we are focused on something. The moment we switch of f a
task, we default to this network. Look out the window , bang! Default to the
network. Get up to make cof fee, bang! We default to the network.
Dr. Raichle told us that this unconscious processing “is truly most of
what we really do; because if we didn’ t we’d be pretty hopeless.” The
network is always on, always engaged, interrupted only when we have to
perform a specific task. And this is why it uses twenty times more ener gy
than the conscious, task-focused part of the brain.8
“The brain is active all of the time,” Dr . Raichle told us, “whether you
are awake or asleep, whether you’re engaging in a particular task or you are
daydreaming. The brain is operating almost at full capacity or full strength
pretty much all of the time.”
Unfortunately we are so busy—we have so many tasks to complete to
do our jobs, hit our numbers, achieve our goals—that we leave less and less
time for our genius council to work its magic. We live in an executive
world, which makes it all the more dif ficult for us to sit still and let power
reroute to the genius lounge. But the genius council’ s participation is
essential to breakthrough thinking.
In the mid-1800s, chemists were trying to discover the structure of the
molecule benzene, a key component in gasoline. German chemist Friedrich

August Kekulé set his executive to the task. But it was one night while
dozing of f in front of a fire, having switched of f his executive mode, that
his genius council drew him a picture of a snake eating its own tail.9
Kekulé’ s genius council had given him the metaphor; his executive
interpreted the metaphor and solved the riddle: benzene was a ring. With
that, Kekulé ushered in the modern age of structural or ganic chemistry and
the rise of the pharmaceutical industry . Ever wonder why so many big
pharmaceutical companies are German: Merck, Bayer , Roche, Schering?
Kekulé set up his breakthrough lab at the University of Bonn.
Kekulé, like Einstein, Edison, Dalí, Tesla, Watts, and countless other
innovators, achieved his breakthrough thanks to the back-and-forth switch
between his executive mode and his genius mode. In fact, Dr . Raichle told
us that it was after leaving a meeting and walking down the hall that he had
the breakthrough leading to the default network’ s discovery .
So how can you access your genius mode?
Sleep on It (Y es, Really)
Adam Cheyer is the creator of Siri, Apple’ s artificial intelligence iPhone
voice assistant. Building Siri was a Herculean design and programming
task. The sheer number of variables—the ability to understand varying
speech patterns, the ability to search based on the random ways people
would request information, the ability to return answers in a useful way—
were each a massive challenge in its own right. Thankfully , Cheyer had a
secret weapon: ready access to his genius mode.
Although designing and building Siri was a highly structured task,
Cheyer knew better than to try to logically grind out every answer . Instead,
he told us, “I sleep on the issues I’m wrestling with.”10 Cheyer , like Dalí
and Edison, has discovered the incredible breakthrough power of the
hypnagogic and hypnopompic states, the half-asleep periods just before
falling asleep and just before waking. These are times when our genius
council runs on hyperdrive.
“I go to bed around eleven, noodling on a problem as I fall asleep,” he
explained. By “noodling” on the problem, Cheyer uses his EN to
deliberately and consciously focus his genius council on a question.

He relies on his genius council to make new associations and deliver
breakthroughs while asleep. In the morning he goes to his desk and uses his
EN to process the night’ s harvest of ideas.
Morning after morning while first designing Siri, he would wake up
with new insights from his DN. He’d use his EN to integrate them into the
prototype he was building. Eventually , he felt that he had something
concrete enough to show the rest of the world.
The hypnagogic and hypnopompic states are so fruitful for creativity
because our inhibiting frontal lobes—where our EN’ s front of fice is located
—are quiet, and our DN is running strong.11
Falling Asleep: Accessing Your Hypnagogic State
The hypnopompic state is the brief period of time just as you’re waking up,
while the hypnagogic state is a similarly brief period of time just as you’re
falling asleep.
Putting It into Practice: How to Enter the Hypnagogic State
Clear the room of clutter and distractions.
Have pen and paper , voice recorder , your phone on airplane mode and set to take notes,
or . . .
Dim the lights (or wear an eye mask).
Ensure you’re in a quiet place, or that only white noise is audible.
Don’ t get too comfortable—no wearing pajamas or getting in bed.
Try to find time at midday , or right after you’ve eaten, when you’re just the right
amount of tired.
Set your alarm for ten to fifteen minutes.
Take a moment to focus your brain on the problem, and then let it go. Relax and drift
off.
You’ll have better luck with the hypnagogic state if you do some prep work.
Sifting through memories of your problem, partial solutions, the contours of

your question, and the relevant information you have before you go to sleep
is important. It’ s up to you to set a direction for your brain to wander in. It
is as if there were a reception desk in your brain saying, “W elcome to
hypnagogic state. What would you like your geniuses to ponder?” You
answer the question by thinking about the problem.
Have a pad and pencil or a phone voice recorder nearby , but no other
distractions—nothing to get in the way of your recording whatever
information comes from the hypnagogic state, whether it’ s in the form of
words or an image.
Dim lighting can help, too. When you’re having an insight, your visual
cortex goes into alpha waves—that is, your brain actually ceases to process
visual information. In order to support the breakthrough ability of the
hypnagogic state, you want to enable your visual cortex to go of f line
unimpeded, and low lighting is just the thing.
We recommend blocking the light rather than turning it of f entirely
simply because you might need the light to write, and you want to do as few
things as possible between waking up and recording your ideas. You might
try wearing an eye mask; this will block the light but will be fast and easy
to remove, allowing you to begin recording your breakthrough almost
immediately .
Sound can be a matter of personal preference. Some people will want to
eliminate all sound; others may prefer white noise, a fan, nature sounds, or
the television on low volume.
Research strongly indicates that a midday nap enhances most people’ s
cognitive abilities for the rest of the day , and that we get the most benefits
from naps that last fifteen to twenty-five minutes. So if you try this exercise
and don’ t awaken with a breakthrough, you’ll at least be sharper and more
productive for the rest of the day .*
If you want to go high tech, consider Napwell, a napping mask created
by MIT  and Harvard Medical School students that uses sleep-cycle
monitoring to optimize napping. Waking up during the deep sleep portion of
your cycle makes you groggy and unproductive, but Napwell monitors your
sleep cycle to wake you up at the optimal time, and even uses light to
mimic a natural sunrise.
Don’ t get frustrated if you find you’re not actually falling asleep: first,
it might take some practice; and second, breakthroughs often come while