

The Charisma Myth
OceanofPDF .com

The Charisma Myth
How Anyone Can
Master the Art and Science
of Personal Magnetism
Olivia F ox Cabane
Portfolio • P enguin
OceanofPDF .com

PORTFOLIO / PENGUIN
Published by the P enguin Gr oup
Penguin Gr oup (US A) Inc., 375 Hudson Str eet,
New Y ork, New Y ork 10014, U.S.A .
Penguin Gr oup (Canada), 90 Eglinton A venue East, Suite 700,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada M4P 2Y3
(a division of P earson P enguin Canada Inc.)
Penguin Books Ltd, 80 Strand, L ondon WC2R 0RL, England
Penguin Ir eland, 25 St. Stephen’s Gr een, Dublin 2, Ir eland
(a division of P enguin Books Ltd)
Penguin Books Australia Ltd, 250 Camberwell R oad, Camberwell,
Victoria 3124, Australia
(a division of P earson Australia Gr oup Pty Ltd)
Penguin Books India Pvt Ltd, 11 Community Centr e, Panchsheel P ark,
New Delhi–110 017, India
Penguin Gr oup (NZ), 67 Apollo Drive, R osedale, Auckland 0632,
New Zealand (a division of P earson New Zealand Ltd)
Penguin Books (South A frica) (Pty) Ltd, 24 Stur dee A venue,
Rosebank, Johannesbur g 2196, South A frica
Penguin Books Ltd, R egister ed Oﬃces:
80 Strand, L ondon WC2R 0RL, England
First published in 2012 by P ortfolio/P enguin,
a member of P enguin Gr oup (US A) Inc.
1 3 5 7 9 10 8 6 4 2
Copyright © Olivia F ox Cabane, 2012
All rights r eserved
Library of Congr ess Cataloging-in-P ublication Data
Cabane, Olivia F ox.
The charisma myth : how anyone can master the art and science of personal
magnetism / Olivia F ox Cabane.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical r eferences and inde x.
ISBN: 978-1-101-56030-3
1. Charisma (P ersonality trait) I. T itle.
BF698.35.C45C33 2012
158.2—dc23
2011043729
Printed in the United States of America
Set in A dobe Caslon P ro
Designed by Elyse Str ongin and Neuwirth & Associates

No part of this book may be r eproduced, scanned, or distributed in any printed
or electr onic for m without per mission. Please do not participate in or encourage
piracy of copyrighted materials in violation of the author’s rights. P urchase only
authorized editions.
While the author has made every eﬀort to pr ovide accurate telephone numbers
and Inter net addr esses at the time of publication, neither the publisher nor the
author assumes any r esponsibility for er rors, or for changes that occur af ter
publication. F urther, the publisher does not have any contr ol over and does not
assume any r esponsibility for author or thir d-party W eb sites or their content.
ALWAYS LEARNING PEARSON
OceanofPDF .com

C o n t e n t s
Introduction
1 Charisma Demystiﬁed
2 The Charismatic Behaviors: P resence, P ower, and
Warmth
3 The Obstacles to P resence, P ower, and W armth
4 Over coming the Obstacles
5 Creating Charismatic Mental States
6 Diﬀer ent Charisma Styles
7 Charismatic F irst Impr essions
8 Speaking—and Listening—with Charisma
9 Charismatic Body Language
10 Diﬃcult Situations
11 Presenting with Charisma
12 Charisma in a Crisis
13 The Charismatic Life: Rising to the Challenge
Conclusion
Recommended R esour ces
Chapter Summaries
Charisma Ex ercises
Acknowledgments
Notes
About the Author

Index
OceanofPDF .com

Introduction
MARIL YN MONROE W ANTED  to pr ove a point.
It was a sunny summer day in New Y ork City, 1955. W ith a
magazine editor and a photographer in tow, Marilyn walk ed
down into Grand Central T erminal. Though it was the middle
of a busy workday and the platfor m was pack ed with
people, not a single person noticed her as she stood waiting
for the subway . As the photographer’s camera click ed, she
boarded the train and r ode along quietly in a cor ner of the
car. Nobody r ecognized her .
Marilyn wanted to show that just by deciding to, she could
be either glamor ous Marilyn Monr oe or plain Nor ma Jean
Baker. On the subway, she was Nor ma Jean. But when she
resurfaced onto the busy New Y ork sidewalks, she decided
to tur n into Marilyn. She look ed ar ound and teasingly ask ed
her photographer : “Do you want to see her?” Ther e wer e no
grand gestur es—she just “ﬂuﬀed up her hair, and struck a
pose.”
With this simple shif t, she suddenly became magnetic. An
aura of magic seemed to ripple out fr om her, and everything
stopped. T ime stood still, as did the people ar ound her, who
blinked in amazement as they suddenly r ecognized the star
standing in their midst. In an instant Marilyn was engulfed
by fans, and “it took several shoving, scary minutes” for the
photographer to help her to escape the gr owing cr owd. 1
Charisma has always been an intriguing and contr oversial
topic. When I tell people at confer ences or cocktail parties
that I “teach charisma,” they immediately perk up and of ten
exclaim, “ But I thought it was something that you either
have or don’t.” Some see it as an unfair advantage, others
are eager to lear n, everyone  is fascinated. And they ar e

right to be so . Charismatic people impact the world, whether
they’r e starting new pr ojects, new companies, or new
empir es.
Have you ever wonder ed what it would feel lik e to be as
magnetic as Bill Clinton or as captivating as Steve Jobs was?
Whether you think you alr eady have some charisma and
would lik e to tak e it to the ne xt level or you’ve been wishing
for a bit of that magic but think that you just ar en’t the
charismatic type, I have good news: charisma is a skill that
you can lear n and practice.
What Will Charisma Do for Y ou?
Imagine what your life would be lik e if you knew that the
moment you enter ed a r oom, people would immediately
take notice, want to hear what you have to say, and be
eager to ear n your appr oval.
For charismatic people, this is a way of life. Everyone is
impacted by their pr esence. P eople ar e magnetically drawn
to them and feel strangely compelled to help them in any
way they can. Charismatic people seem to lead char med
lives: they have mor e romantic options, they mak e mor e
money, and they e xperience less str ess.
Charisma gets people to lik e you, trust you, and want to
be led by you. It can deter mine whether you’r e seen as a
follower or a leader, whether your ideas get adopted, and
how eﬀectively your pr ojects ar e implemented. Lik e it or
not, charisma can mak e the world go r ound—it mak es
people want  to do what you want them to do .
Charisma is, of course, critical in business. Whether you’r e
applying for a new job or want to advance within your
organization, it will help you achieve your goal. Multiple
concur ring studies indicate that charismatic people r eceive
higher perfor mance ratings and ar e viewed as mor e
eﬀective by their superiors and subor dinates. 2

If you’r e a leader, or aspir e to be one, charisma matters. It
gives you a competitive advantage in attracting and
retaining the very best talent. It mak es people want to work
with you, your team, and your company . Resear ch shows
that those following charismatic leaders perfor m better,
experience their work as mor e meaningful, and have mor e
trust in their leaders than those following eﬀective but
noncharismatic leaders. 3
As Wharton School business pr ofessor R obert House
notes, charismatic leaders “cause followers to become
highly committed to the leader’s mission, to mak e
signiﬁcant personal sacriﬁces, and to perfor m above and
beyond the call of duty .”4
Charisma is what enables one successful salesman to sell
ﬁve times mor e than his colleagues in the same r egion. It’s
the diﬀer ence between entr epreneurs who have investors
banging on their doors and those who have to beg the bank
for a loan.
The power of charisma is equally valuable outside of the
business envir onment. It’s useful for the stay -at-home mom
who needs to inﬂuence her childr en, their teachers, or other
community members. It can be an invaluable tool for high
school students who’d lik e to ace their college interviews or
are running for leadership r oles in student or ganizations. It
can help individuals become mor e popular with their peers
and feel mor e conﬁdent in social situations. Charismatic
physicians ar e better lik ed by patients and ar e in gr eater
demand, and their patients ar e mor e likely to adher e to the
medical tr eatments they pr escribe. They’r e also less lik ely
to be sued when things go wr ong. Charisma matters even in
resear ch and academia: charismatic individuals ar e mor e
likely to get published, to attract r esear ch funding fr om
industry grants, or to teach the most desirable courses. The
professor who is always sur rounded by admiring students
after lectur es—that’s charisma, too .

It’s Not Magic, It’s Learned Behaviors
Contrary to popular belief, people ar e not simply bor n
charismatic—innately magnetic fr om birth. If charisma wer e
an inher ent attribute, charismatic people would always be
captivating, and that’s just not the case. Even for the most
engaging superstar, charisma can be pr esent one moment
and absent the ne xt. Marilyn Monr oe could “tur n oﬀ” her
charisma lik e ﬂipping a switch and go completely unnoticed.
To turn her charisma back on, she simply changed her body
language.
As extensive r esear ch in r ecent years has shown,
charisma is the r esult of speciﬁc nonverbal behaviors, 5 not
an inher ent or magical personal quality . This is one of the
reasons why charisma levels ﬂuctuate: its pr esence depends
on whether or not someone is e xhibiting these behaviors.
Have you ever had the e xperience of feeling totally
conﬁdent, master of a situation? A moment when people
seemed impr essed by you—even just one moment of the
people ar ound you going “W ow!” W e don’t necessarily think
of these e xperiences as charisma, or consider ourselves
charismatic, because we assume that charismatic people
are magnetic every instant of every day . They ar en’t.
One of the r easons charisma is mistak enly held to be
innate is that, lik e many other social skills, charismatic
behaviors ar e generally lear ned early in life. In fact, people
usually don’t consciously r ealize they ar e lear ning them.
They’r e just trying new behaviors, seeing the r esults, and
reﬁning them. Eventually, the behaviors become instinctive.
Countless well-known charismatic ﬁgur es work ed har d to
gain their charisma, incr easing it step by step. But because
we come to know them at the peak of their charisma, it can
be har d to believe these superstars wer en’t always so
impressive.
Former Apple CEO Steve Jobs, consider ed one of the most
charismatic CEOs of the decade, did not start out that way .

In fact, if you watch his earliest pr esentations, you’ll see
that he came acr oss as bashful and awkwar d, veering fr om
overly dramatic to downright nerdy. Jobs pr ogressively
increased his level of charisma over the years, and you can
see the gradual impr ovement in his public appearances.
Charisma has come under the scrutiny of sociologists,
psychologists, and cognitive and behavioral scientists. It has
been studied in multiple ways, fr om clinical laboratory
experiments and cr oss-sectional and longitudinal survey
resear ch to qualitative interpr etative analysis. The subjects
of these studies have been pr esidents, military leaders,
students of all ages, and business e xecutives fr om low-level
managers to CEOs. Thanks to such r esear ch, we now
understand charisma as a set of behaviors.
What Does Charismatic Behavior Look Lik e?
When we ﬁrst meet someone, we instinctively assess
whether that person is a potential friend or foe and whether
they have the power to enact those intentions. P ower and
intentions ar e what we’r e aiming to assess. “ Could you
move mountains for me? And would you car e to do so?” T o
answer the ﬁrst question, we try to assess how much power
he or she has. T o answer the second question, we try to
assess how much he or she lik es us. When you meet a
charismatic person, you get the impr ession that they have a
lot of power and they lik e you a lot.
The equation that pr oduces charisma is actually fairly
simple. All you have to do is give the impr ession that you
possess both high power and high war mth, since
charismatic behaviors pr oject a combination of these two
qualities. “ Fight or ﬂight?” is the power question. “ Friend or
foe?” is the war mth question.
A ﬁnal dimension underlies both of these qualities:
presence. When people describe their e xperience of seeing

charisma in action, whether they met Colin P owell,
Condoleezza Rice, or the Dalai Lama, they of ten mention
the individual’s e xtraor dinary “pr esence.”
Presence is the single most r equested aspect of charisma
when I’m coaching e xecutives. They want to incr ease their
executive pr esence  or boardroom pr esence . And they’r e
right to focus on it: pr esence tur ns out to be the r eal cor e
component of charisma, the foundation upon which all else
is built. When you’r e with a charismatic master—tak e Bill
Clinton, for e xample—you not only feel his power and a
sense of war m engagement, you also feel that he’s
completely her e with you, in this moment. P resent.
Practical Magic
Charisma has been tur ned into an applied science. What
this book does is translate the science into practical,
immediately applicable tools, with measurable r esults. Y ou’ll
learn charisma in a methodical, systematic way, with
practical e xercises immediately useful in the r eal world.
And, unlik e those of us who lear ned by trial and er ror, you
won’t have to waste any time ﬁguring out what works and
what doesn’t. You can go straight to the tried-and-true tools
that r eally do enhance charisma.
Becoming mor e charismatic does involve work—work that
is sometimes har d, uncomfortable, and even daunting. But
it’s also incr edibly r ewar ding, both in ter ms of how you will
relate to yourself and how others will r elate to you. It
involves managing your mental ecosystem, understanding
and attending to your own needs, as well as knowing which
behaviors inspir e others to see you as charismatic and
learning how to pr oject them.
This book will guide you thr ough that pr ocess. It will give
you concr ete tools for pr ojecting the thr ee crucial aspects of
charisma: pr esence, power, and war mth. As you use them,

you will e xperience an incr eased sense of personal
magnetism—and if it was alr eady str ongly pr esent, you’ll
gain ﬁner contr ol over that charismatic power . You’ll lear n
how to har ness it and how to skillfully wield it. Y ou’ll also
learn how to choose the right kind of charisma for your
personality and your goals in any situation.
You’ll get an inside peek at what goes on in the minds—
and bodies—of charismatic people. I’ll give you insights into
what the CEOs I coach wr estle with behind closed doors.
What you’ll ﬁnd her e is practical magic: unique
knowledge, drawn from a variety of sciences, r evealing what
charisma r eally is and how it works. Y ou’ll get both the
insights and the techniques you need to apply this
knowledge. The world will become your lab, and every time
you meet someone, you’ll get an opportunity to e xperiment.
Once you’ve master ed the basics, you’ll be r eady to lear n
how to be charismatic even in diﬃcult situations, for
instance when you’r e having a car eer-changing
conversation, dealing with a diﬃcult person, or delivering a
presentation. And once you know how to access charisma at
will, you’ll get the insider secr ets to living life as a
charismatic person.
You’ll lear n how to become mor e inﬂuential, mor e
persuasive, and mor e inspiring. Y ou’ll lear n how to e xude
charisma—the ability to move thr ough a r oom and have
people go, “W ow, who’s that?”
OceanofPDF .com

1
Charisma Demystiﬁed
IN THE TORRID  London summer of 1886, W illiam Gladstone was
up against Benjamin Disraeli for the post of prime minister
of the United Kingdom. This was the V ictorian era, so
whoever won was going to rule half the world. In the very
last week befor e the election, both men happened to tak e
the same young woman out to dinner . Naturally, the pr ess
asked her what impr essions the rivals had made. She said,
“After dining with Mr . Gladstone, I thought he was the
clever est person in England. But af ter dining with Mr .
Disraeli, I thought I was the clever est person in England.”
Guess who won the election? It was the man who made
others  feel intelligent, impr essive, and fascinating: Benjamin
Disraeli.
Consciously or not, charismatic individuals choose speciﬁc
behaviors that mak e other people feel a certain way . These
behaviors can be lear ned and perfected by anyone. In fact,
in contr olled laboratory e xperiments, r esear chers wer e able
to raise and lower people’s levels of charisma as if they
were turning a dial. 1
Contrary to commonly held charisma myths, you don’t
have to be naturally outgoing, you don’t have to be
physically attractive, and you won’t have to change your
personality . No matter wher e you’r e starting fr om, you can
signiﬁcantly incr ease your personal charisma and r eap the
rewar ds both in business and in daily life.
The most common charisma myth is that you have to be
naturally boister ous or outgoing to be charismatic. One of

the most inter esting r esear ch ﬁndings is that you can be a
very charismatic intr overt. In W ester n society, we place
such emphasis on the skills and abilities of e xtroverts that
introverts can end up feeling defective and uncool. But
introversion is not a ter minal handicap. In fact, as we’ll see,
it can be a str ong advantage for certain for ms of charisma.
It is also a myth that you have to be attractive to be
charismatic. Countless charismatic ﬁgur es wer e far fr om
ﬁtting classic standar ds of beauty . Chur chill was not
generally consider ed handsome and certainly not known for
his se x appeal. And yet he was one of history’s most
inﬂuential and powerful leaders.
Yes, good looks do confer some advantage. But it’s very
possible to be charismatic without a striking face or ﬁgur e.
In fact, charisma itself will mak e you mor e attractive. When
instructed to e xhibit speciﬁc charismatic behaviors in
contr olled e xperiments, participants’ levels of attractiveness
were rated signiﬁcantly higher than befor e.2
Last but not least, you won’t have to change your
personality . In or der to become mor e charismatic, you don’t
have to for ce yourself into one particular personality style or
do something that is against your natur e.
Instead, you will lear n some new skills.
Through charisma training you will lear n how to adopt a
charismatic postur e, how to war m up your eye contact, and
how to modulate your voice in ways that mak e people pay
attention. Thr ee quick tips to gain an instant charisma boost
in conversation:
Lower the intonation of your voice at the end of your
sentences.
Reduce how quickly and how of ten you nod.
Pause for two full seconds befor e you speak.
As you can see, these ar e simple tweaks, not deep value
changes. Y our personality will stay the same as long as you

want it to .
Will these new skills and behaviors feel odd at ﬁrst? They
may. But, then, so did brushing your teeth when you ﬁrst
learned how, though now (I hope) it’s become a habit you
perfor m each day without thinking. Lik e many new skills,
charismatic behaviors might feel awkwar d at ﬁrst, but with
practice they will become second natur e, like walking,
talking, or driving. This book is your step-by -step guide to
acquiring these behaviors and making them your own.
We understand that pr oﬁciency at chess, singing, or
hitting a fastball r equir es conscious practice. Charisma is a
skill that can also be developed thr ough conscious practice,
and because we’r e interacting with people all the time, we
get to use our charisma tools on a daily basis.
I know that a person’s charisma level can be changed
through conscious practice because I’ve helped countless
clients incr ease theirs in this way . Interviewing people close
to my clients befor e and af ter our work together conﬁr med
that they wer e able to change how people per ceived them.
I’ve also taught these charisma tools at both the
under graduate and graduate levels, af ter UC Berk eley’s
business school ask ed me to cr eate a complete cur riculum
for charisma and leadership.
If you follow the instructions in this book, you will increase
your level of charisma. And once these practices become
second natur e, they k eep operating in the backgr ound
without your needing to give them any thought—and you’ll
keep r eaping their r ewar ds from then onwar d.
How This Will W ork for Y ou
I’ve r everse-engineer ed the science of charisma by lear ning
the behavioral and cognitive science behind it and striving
to extract the most practical tools and techniques. This book

helps you put the science into practice so that you can
accelerate your lear ning curve.
I am oﬀering you the tools that will give you the highest
return on your investment and the best, most eﬀective
techniques fr om a br oad range of disciplines—fr om
behavioral, cognitive, and neur oscience to meditation; fr om
peak-perfor mance athletic conditioning to Hollywood
Method acting.
I’ll give you the science when it’s r elevant (or fun, or
fascinating), and, mor e important, I’ll give you the practical
tools. My goal with this book is to give you techniques you
can immediately apply to gain both the skills and the self -
conﬁdence that lead to outstanding perfor mance.
When I’m ask ed how soon my coaching pr oduces r esults, I
answer : In one session, you’ll feel the diﬀer ence. In two
sessions, others will see the diﬀer ence. In thr ee sessions,
you’ll have a whole new pr esence.
However, just r eading this book won’t yield its full
beneﬁts. Y ou would be shortchanging yourself if you avoided
any of the e xercises, as odd or even uncomfortable as they
may feel at times. T o be successful, you have to be willing to
put in the eﬀort of applying what you r ead. When an
exercise asks you to close your eyes and imagine a scene,
really close your eyes and do it. When I ask you to write out
a scenario, grab a piece of paper and a pen that writes.
This is the very challenge I bring into the oﬃce of every
executive who’s ever hir ed me. Ther e is no substitute for
doing the e xercises. Skimming thr ough them with the
earnest intention of completing them “another day” is not
enough, nor is doing only the e xercises that seem easy or
interesting. If I ask you to do something, it’s for a good
reason, and it will have a r eal impact on your level of
charisma.
Some of the techniques you’ll lear n her e will give you
results immediately, such as lear ning how to be charismatic
when pr esenting to audiences small or lar ge. Others will

take weeks to fully unfold. Some might be surprising, lik e
learning how your toes can help maximize your charisma
potential.
When I ask ed one of my clients what advice he would give
others about to start this work, he said: “T ell them that:
even though it can seem intimidating at ﬁrst, and you’ll be
taken out of your comfort zone, it’s worth it.” Commit, and
do your homework.
OceanofPDF .com

2
The Charismatic Behaviors
Presence, Power , and W armth
CHARISMA TIC BEHA VIOR CAN  be br oken down into thr ee cor e
elements: pr esence, power, and war mth. These elements
depend both on our conscious behaviors and on factors we
don’t consciously contr ol. People pick up on messages we
often don’t even r ealize we’r e sending thr ough small
changes in our body language. In this chapter, we’ll e xplor e
how these signals can be inﬂuenced. In or der to be
charismatic, we need to choose mental states that mak e our
body language, wor ds, and behaviors ﬂow together and
express the thr ee cor e elements of charisma. Since
presence is the foundation for everything else, that’s wher e
we’ll start.
Presence
Have you ever felt, in the middle of a conversation, as if
only half of your mind wer e present while the other half was
busy doing something else? Do you think the other person
noticed?
If you’r e not fully pr esent in an interaction, ther e’s a good
chance that your eyes will glaze over or that your facial
reactions will be a split-second delayed. Since the human
mind can r ead facial e xpressions in as little as seventeen
milliseconds, 1 the person you’r e speaking with will lik ely
notice even the tiniest delays in your r eactions.

We may think that we can fak e presence. W e may think
that we can fak e listening. W e believe that as long as we
seem attentive, it’s ok ay to let our brains chur n on other
things. But we’r e wrong. When we’r e not fully pr esent in an
interaction, people will see it. Our body language sends a
clear message that other people r ead and r eact to, at least
on a subconscious level.
You’ve sur ely had the e xperience of talking to someone
who wasn’t r eally listening. Maybe they seemed to be just
“going thr ough the motions” of listening to you so you
wouldn’t be oﬀended. Somehow, they didn’t seem to be
paying full attention. How did you feel then? Brushed oﬀ?
Annoyed? Just plain bad? As a student in one of my Harvar d
lectur es told me: “It happened r ecently when I was talking
to someone—I felt she wasn’t r eally pr esent. I felt r esentful,
inferior to whatever was mor e important to her than our
conversation.”
Not only can the lack of pr esence be visible, it can also be
perceived as inauthentic, which has even worse emotional
consequences. When you’r e per ceived as disingenuous, it’s
virtually impossible to generate trust, rapport, or loyalty .
And it’s impossible to be charismatic.
Presence is a lear nable skill. Lik e any other ability (fr om
painting to playing the piano), you can incr ease it with
practice and patience. Being pr esent means simply having a
moment-to -moment awar eness of what’s happening. It
means paying attention to what’s going on rather than
being caught up in your own thoughts.
Now that you know the cost of lacking pr esence, try the
exercise on the ne xt page to test yourself, see how pr esent
you can be, and lear n three simple techniques to
immediately boost your charisma in personal interactions.
Putting It into Practice: Presence

Here are a few techniques for r emaining pr esent,
adapted fr om mindfulness disciplines. All you need is a
reasonably quiet place wher e you can close your eyes
(whether standing or sitting) for just one minute and a
way to k eep track of time.
Set the timer for one minute. Close your eyes and try
to focus on one of the following thr ee things: the sounds
around you, your br eathing, or the sensations in your
toes.
1. Sounds: Scan your envir onment for sound. As a
meditation teacher told me, “Imagine that your ears
are satellite dishes, passively and objectively
registering sounds.”
2. Your br eath: F ocus on your br eath and the
sensations it cr eates in your nostrils or stomach as it
goes in and out. P ay attention to one br eath at a
time, but try to notice everything  about this one
breath. Imagine that your br eath is someone you
want to give your full attention to .
3. Your toes: F ocus your attention on the sensations in
your toes. This for ces your mind to sweep thr ough
your body, helping you to get into the physical
sensations of the moment.
So how did that go? Did you ﬁnd your mind constantly
wandering even though you wer e trying your best to be
present? As you’ve noticed, staying fully pr esent isn’t
always easy . Ther e are two main r easons for this.
First, our brains ar e wir ed to pay attention to novel stimuli,
whether they be sights, smells, or sounds. W e’re wir ed to be
distracted, to have our attention grabbed by any new
stimulus: It could be important! It could eat us! This

tendency was k ey to our ancestors’ survival. Imagine two
tribesmen hunting thr ough the plains, sear ching the horizon
for signs of the antelope that could feed their family .
Something ﬂick ers in the distance. The tribesman whose
attention wasn’t immediately caught? He’s not our ancestor .
The second r eason is that our society encourages
distraction. The constant inﬂux of stimulation we r eceive
worsens our natural tendencies. This can eventually lead us
into a state of continuous partial attention,  in which we
never give our full attention to any single thing. W e’re
always partially distracted.
So if you of ten ﬁnd it har d to be fully pr esent, don’t beat
yourself up. This is entir ely nor mal. P resence is har d for
almost all of us. A 2,250-person study coauthor ed by
Harvar d psychologist Daniel Gilbert estimated that nearly
half of the average person’s time was spent “mind
wandering.” 2 Even meditation masters can ﬁnd their minds
wandering during their practice. In fact, this is a common
subject of jok es during intensive meditation r etreats (yes,
there are such things as meditation jok es).
The good news is that even a minor incr ease in your
capacity for pr esence can have a major eﬀect on those
around you. Because so few of us ar e ever fully pr esent, if
you can manage even a few moments of full pr esence fr om
time to time, you’ll mak e quite an impact.
The very ne xt time you’r e in a conversation, try to
regularly check whether your mind is fully engaged or
whether it is wandering elsewher e (including pr eparing your
next sentence). Aim to bring yourself back to the pr esent
moment as of ten as you can by focusing on your br eath or
your toes for just a second, and then get back to focusing
on the other person.
One of my clients, af ter trying this e xercise for the ﬁrst
time, r eported: “I found myself r elaxing, smiling, and others
suddenly noticed me and smiled back without my saying a
word.”

Don’t be discouraged if you feel that you didn’t fully
succeed in the one-minute e xercise above. Y ou actually did
gain a charisma boost right then and ther e simply by
practicing pr esence. And because you’ve alr eady gained the
mindset shif t (awar eness of the importance of pr esence and
the cost of the lack of it), you’r e now alr eady ahead of the
game. If you wer e to stop right her e and r ead nothing
further, it would be well worth it.
Here’s how this could play out for you in a practical,
everyday setting. L et’s say a colleague walks into your
oﬃce, wanting your opinion on some matter . You have only
a few minutes to spar e befor e your next meeting, and
you’r e wor ried that this might tak e mor e time than you
have.
If you let your mind continue chur ning away while he’s
talking to you, not only will you feel anxious and have a
hard time concentrating, you’ll also give the impr ession that
you’r e restless and not fully pr esent. Y our colleague might
conclude that you don’t car e enough about him or his
problem to r eally pay attention.
If instead you r emember to use one of the quick ﬁx es—
focusing for just a second on your br eath or your toes—this
will instantly bring you back to the pr esent moment. This full
presence will show in your eyes and your face, and will be
seen by the person who’s talking to you. By giving them just
a few moments of full pr esence, they will feel r espected and
listened to . When you’r e fully pr esent, it shows in your body
language in a highly charisma-enhancing way .
Being charismatic does not depend on how much time you
have but on how fully pr esent you ar e in each interaction.
The ability to be fully pr esent mak es you stand out fr om the
crowd; it mak es you memorable. When you’r e fully pr esent,
even a ﬁve-minute conversation can cr eate a “ wow” eﬀect,
as well as an emotional connection. The people you’r e with
feel that they have your full attention and that they ar e the
most important thing in the world to you at that moment.

One client told me that he fr equently upset people when
he was under pr essur e or dealing with multiple r equests. If
someone came to see him, while they talk ed his mind would
wander back to whatever he had been working on, and as a
result that person felt brushed oﬀ and unimportant.
After putting some of these focus e xercises to work, he
reported, “I lear ned how valuable it was to give them my full
attention even for just a few moments, and the techniques
helped me stay pr esent in that moment. As a r esult, people
left my oﬃce feeling car ed for, special.” This, he told me,
was one of the most valuable lessons he’d lear ned fr om all
our work together .
Increasing your ability to be pr esent not only impr oves
your body language, listening skills, and mental focus, it
could even enhance your ability to enjoy life. T oo of ten when
a special moment ar rives, such as a celebration or even a
few minutes of quality time with a loved one, our mind is
running in six diﬀer ent dir ections.
Meditation teacher T ara Brach has made the practice of
being pr esent  a lifetime study . Her e’s how she puts it: “In
most moments we have a continuous inter nal commentary
on what is happening and what we should do ne xt. W e
might gr eet a friend with a hug, but the war mth of our
greeting becomes blur red by our computations about how
long to embrace or what we’r e going to say when we’r e
done. W e rush thr ough the motions, not fully pr esent.”
Being pr esent enables you to fully notice and drink in the
good moments.
You’ve just gained thr ee instant ﬁx es to use during
interactions, and thr ough practice, they can become second
natur e. Remember that every time you bring yourself back
to full pr esence, you r eap major r ewar ds: you become mor e
impactful, mor e memorable, and come acr oss as mor e
grounded. Y ou’re laying the foundation for a charismatic
presence.

Now that you know what pr esence is, why it matters to
charisma, and how to get it, let’s look at the other two
crucial charisma qualities: power and war mth.
Power and W armth
Being seen as powerful means being per ceived as able to
aﬀect the world ar ound us, whether thr ough inﬂuence on or
authority over others, lar ge amounts of money, e xpertise,
intelligence, sheer physical str ength, or high social status.
We look for clues of power in someone’s appearance, in
others’ r eaction to this person, and, most of all, in the
person’s body language.
Warmth, simply put, is goodwill towar d others. W armth
tells us whether or not people will want to use whatever
power they have in our favor . Being seen as war m means
being per ceived as any of the following: benevolent,
altruistic, caring, or willing to impact our world in a positive
way. Warmth is assessed almost entir ely thr ough body
language and behavior; it’s evaluated mor e directly than
power .
How do we gauge power and war mth? Imagine that you’r e
meeting someone for the ﬁrst time. In most instances you
don’t have the beneﬁt of an e xtensive backgr ound check,
interviews with friends or r elatives, or even the time to wait
and observe their behavior . So in most instances you have
to mak e a quick guess.
Throughout our interactions, we instinctively look for clues
with which to evaluate war mth or power, and then we adjust
our assumptions accor dingly . Expensive clothing leads us to
assume  wealth, friendly body language leads us to assume
good intentions, a conﬁdent postur e leads us to assume  the
person has something to be conﬁdent about. In essence,
people will tend to accept whatever you pr oject.

Just by incr easing your pr ojection of power or your
projection of war mth, you incr ease your level of charisma.
But when you can pr oject both power and war mth together,
you r eally maximize your personal charisma potential.
Today, ther e are many ways to be per ceived as powerful,
from displaying intelligence (think Bill Gates) to displaying
kindness (think the Dalai Lama). But in the earliest days of
human history, one for m of power was pr edominant: brute
force. Yes, intelligence was valuable, but much less than it is
today—it’s har d to imagine Bill Gates faring well in the
jungle. F ew of those who gained positions of power thr ough
raw str ength and aggr ession would have also e xhibited
much war mth. The combination of power and war mth would
have been very rar e and very, very pr ecious: a powerful
person who also viewed us kindly could mean the diﬀer ence
between life and death in critical moments. F iguring out who
might want to help us and who has the power to do so has
always been critical to our survival.
That’s why our r eaction to power and war mth is wir ed so
deep. W e react to these qualities as we do to fat and sugar .
Our ancestors survived by having a str ong positive r eaction
to fat and sugar—they aided our survival and wer e scar ce in
our original envir onment. Though they’r e abundant today,
our instinct r emains. The same holds true for charisma:
though the combination of war mth and power is far easier
for people to attain today, it still plays powerfully on our
instincts. F rom lab e xperiments to neur oimaging, r esear ch
has consistently shown that they ar e the two dimensions we
evaluate ﬁrst and for emost in assessing other people. 3
Both power and war mth ar e necessary conditions for
charisma. Someone who is powerful but not war m can be
impressive, but isn’t necessarily per ceived as charismatic
and can come acr oss as ar rogant, cold, or standoﬃsh.
Someone who possesses war mth without power can be
likable, but isn’t necessarily per ceived as charismatic and

can come acr oss as over eager, subservient, or desperate to
please.
William Gladstone pr ojected power during the 1886
elections. A high-status individual of str ong political weight
and powerful connections, known for k een intelligence and
deep knowledge, he impr essed his young dinner companion
with his power, but lack ed the war mth to mak e her feel
special.
Disraeli was also pr ojecting power . He, too, had a history
of political power, impr essive wit, and k een intelligence. But
Disraeli’s genius was his ability to mak e whomever he was
speaking with feel intelligent and fascinating. He pr ojected
presence and war mth in addition to power and was
handsomely r ewar ded for it.
Though other appr oaches to charisma ar e possible, the
combination of pr esence, power, and war mth is one of the
most eﬀective frameworks to help maximize your full
charisma potential.
Charismatic Body Language
After extensive studies, the MIT Media Lab concluded that it
could pr edict the outcome of negotiations, telephone sales
calls, and business plan pitches with 87 per cent accuracy
simply by analyzing participants’ body language, without
listening to a single wor d of content. 4
Though this may sound incr edible—how could wor ds car ry
so little weight compar ed to the body language of the
person delivering them?—it actually mak es sense. In the
scope of human evolution, language is a r elatively r ecent
invention. But we’ve been interacting well befor e this
through nonverbal modes of communication. As a r esult,
nonverbal communication is har dwired into our brains,
much deeper than the mor e recent language-pr ocessing

abilities. This is why nonverbal communication has a far
greater impact.
For charisma, your body language matters far mor e than
your wor ds do . No matter how powerful your message or
how skillfully crafted your pitch, if your body language is
wrong, you won’t be charismatic. On the other hand, with
the right body language you can be charismatic without
saying a wor d. Projecting pr esence, power, and war mth
through your body language is of ten all you need to be
perceived as charismatic.
Charisma Begins in the Mind
While you wer e reading the last paragraph, wer e you awar e
that your eyelids wer e regularly ﬂuttering in fr ont of your
eyes?
No? Y et they wer e blinking at pr ecise intervals.
Did you notice the weight of your tongue in your mouth?
Or the position of your toes?
Have you for gotten your eyelids again?
Without our r ealizing it, our bodies send out thousands of
signals every minute. Just lik e our br eath and heartbeat,
these signals ar e part of the millions of bodily functions
contr olled not by our conscious mind but by our
subconscious mind. Ther e is far too much body language for
us to contr ol consciously .
This has two consequences. F irst, because we can’t
consciously contr ol all of our body language, we can’t just
broadcast charismatic body language at will. T o get all the
signals right, we’d need to simultaneously contr ol thousands
of elements, fr om minute vocal ﬂuctuations to the pr ecise
degree and kind of tension ar ound our eyes. It’s practically
impossible. W e can’t micr omanage charismatic body
language. On the other hand, since our subconscious is
responsible for most of our nonverbal signals, if we could

direct our subconscious appr opriately, then the issue would
be solved. (Hint: we can, and you’ll lear n how .)
The second consequence is that our body language
expresses our mental state whether we lik e it or not. Our
facial e xpressions, voice, postur e, and all the other
components of body language r eﬂect our mental and
emotional condition every second. Because we don’t contr ol
this ﬂow consciously, whatever is in our head will show up in
our body language.
Even if we contr ol the main e xpression on our face or the
way we hold our ar ms, legs, or head, if our inter nal state is
diﬀer ent fr om what we’r e aiming to portray, sooner or later
what’s called a microexpression  will ﬂash acr oss our face.
These split-second micr oexpressions may be ﬂeeting, but
they will be caught by observers (r emember, people can
read your face in as little as seventeen milliseconds). And if
there’s an incongruence between our main e xpression and
that micr oexpression, people will feel it on a subconscious
level: their gut will tell them something’s not quite right. *
Have you ever sensed the diﬀer ence between a r eal smile
and a fak e one? Ther e is a clear, visible diﬀer ence between
a social smile  and a true smile . A true smile brings into play
two gr oups of facial muscles—one lif ts the cor ners of the
mouth and the other aﬀects the ar ea ar ound the eyes. In a
genuine smile, while the outer cor ners of the mouth lif t, the
inner cor ners of the eyebr ows sof ten and fall down. In a fak e
smile, only the mouth-cor ner muscle (the zygomatic major)
is used. The smile does not r each the eyes, or at least not in
the same way a r eal smile would, 6 and people can spot the
diﬀer ence.
Because what’s in your mind shows up in your body and
because people will catch even the briefest
microexpression, to be eﬀective, charismatic behaviors
must originate in your mind.
If your inter nal state is anticharismatic, no amount of
eﬀort and willpower can mak e up for it. Sooner or later,

some of your underlying thoughts and feelings will show
through. On the other hand, if your inter nal state is
charismatic, then the right body language will ﬂow forth
eﬀortlessly . Thus, the ﬁrst step in lear ning charisma—and
what the ﬁrst part of this book is all about—is developing
the various mental states that pr oduce charismatic body
language and behaviors.
We will start by gaining some insight into charismatic
mental states—what they ar e, how to best access them, and
how to fully integrate them so they become eﬀortless. Only
afterwar d will we start practicing e xternal charismatic
behaviors. L earning these skills in the r everse or der could
lead to embar rassing r esults. Imagine that you’r e giving an
important pr esentation. Y ou’re doing well, using all the gr eat
new tools you’ve lear ned, being incr edibly charismatic. And
then suddenly, someone says something that rattles your
mental focus and shak es your emotional conﬁdence. Y ou
become ﬂuster ed, and all your newly acquir ed skills ﬂy out
the window .
Striving to acquir e external charisma skills without
learning how to handle your inter nal world is lik e adding
pretty balconies to a house with a weak foundation. It’s a
nice touch, but at the ﬁrst earthquak e everything falls apart.
If your inter nal state is in tur moil, it’s har d to r emember, let
alone use, the new skills you’ve just lear ned. Charismatic
internal skills, which help you manage your inter nal state,
form the necessary foundation upon which to build your
charismatic e xternal skills.
When companies hir e me to help them impr ove
perfor mance—to help their e xecutives become mor e
persuasive, mor e inﬂuential, mor e inspiring—they of ten tell
me that their people possess solid technical  skills. T echnical
skills ar e raw brainpower, what we use to understand the
instructions for assembling fur niture. What these e xecutives
are lacking, I’m told, ar e social skills—and so people ar rive

expecting surface lessons in social graces and business
etiquette.
But what these e xecutives need ﬁrst and for emost ar e
personal, internal skills. Individuals with str ong inter nal skills
are awar e of what e xactly is happening inside them and
know how to handle it. They can r ecognize when their self -
conﬁdence has tak en a hit and have the tools to get back to
a conﬁdent state so that their body language r emains
charismatic.
Here’s a self -rating diagram I of ten draw for the people I
coach, fr om young associates to CEOs, asking them to
evaluate themselves and their subor dinates. T ake a moment
to rate your technical, e xternal, and inter nal skills in the
table below .
I often see brilliant engineers described by others, and by
themselves, as possessing high technical, medium e xternal,
and low inter nal skills. CEOs tend to self -report medium
technical and inter nal skills but high e xternal skills. And
highly charismatic people of ten rate themselves low in
technical skills but high in e xternal and inter nal skills.
While charismatic people may r eport fewer technical skills
than their peers, their inter nal and e xternal skills give them
a far gr eater advantage overall. The inter nal skills necessary
for charisma include both the awar eness of your inter nal
state and the tools to eﬀectively manage it. Chinese

philosopher Lao Tzu r eportedly said: “T o know others is
knowledge. T o know oneself is wisdom.”
What Y our Mind Believes, Y our Body Manifests
Knowing your inter nal world starts with one k ey insight upon
which all charisma is built: your mind can’t tell fact fr om
ﬁction. This is the one dimension of your inter nal world that
can help you get into the right charismatic mental state at
will, and almost instantly .
Have you ever felt your heart pounding during a hor ror
movie? Consciously, you know it’s just a movie. Y ou realize
you ar e watching actors who ar e delighted to pr etend
they’r e being mur dered in e xchange for a nice paycheck. Y et
your brain sees blood and guts on the scr een, so it sends
you straight into ﬁght- or-ﬂight mode, r eleasing adr enaline
into your system. Her e’s how it works in practice:
Think of your favorite piece of music.
Now imagine dragging your ﬁnger nails acr oss a
chalkboar d.
Now imagine plunging your hand into a buck et of sand
and feeling the grains crunch between your ﬁngers.
And now taste the diﬀer ence between lemon and lime—
which is mor e sour?
There was no sand; ther e was no lemon. And yet, in
response to a set of completely imaginary events, your mind
produced very r eal physical r eactions. Because your brain
cannot distinguish imagination fr om reality, imaginary
situations cause your brain to send your body the same
commands as it would for a r eal situation. Whatever your
mind believes, your body will manifest. Just by getting into a
charismatic mental state, your body will manifest a
charismatic body language.
In medicine, the mind’s powerfully positive eﬀect on the
body is known as the placebo eﬀect . A placebo is a

simulated medical pr ocedur e: patients given “pr etend” pills
are told they’r e receiving r eal ones; or people ar e told
they’ve r eceived a medical intervention when in fact
nothing has been done. In a surprising number of cases,
patients given these inert tr eatments still e xperience a r eal
improvement in their medical condition.
The placebo eﬀect was discover ed during W orld W ar I
when medicine stor es had run out and doctors found they
could sometimes still ease their patients’ suﬀering by telling
them that they had administer ed pain-r elieving tr eatments.
It became widely acknowledged during the 1950s as the
medical community began running contr olled clinical
studies. Thr ough much of human history, most of medicine
was in fact pur e placebo: doctors would pr escribe potions or
interventions that we now know to be fundamentally
ineﬀective. Y et people’s conditions still of ten impr oved,
thanks to the mind’s impr essive ability to aﬀect the body .
The placebo eﬀect can sometimes be r emark ably
powerful. Ellen Langer, a Harvar d University pr ofessor of
psychology, gather ed a gr oup of elderly patients in a
nursing-home-lik e envir onment and sur rounded them with
the decor, clothing, food, and music that was popular when
they wer e in their twenties. In the following weeks, physical
exams showed tighter skin, better eyesight, incr eased
muscle str ength, and even higher bone density than befor e.
The placebo eﬀect is the basis for many of the best
charisma-enhancing techniques, and we’ll r efer to it of ten
throughout the book. In fact, this is pr obably something you
already do naturally, and many of the practices will mak e
intuitive sense to you. In the following chapters, we’ll ﬁne-
tune this skill and mak e mor e powerful the inter nal
processes you alr eady use.
The mind- over-body eﬀect also has a cor responding
downside, called the nocebo eﬀect .7 In this case, the mind
creates to xic consequences in the body in r eaction to
completely ﬁctional causes. In one e xperiment, people who

knew they wer e extremely aller gic to poison ivy wer e
rubbed with a completely har mless leaf but told they’d been
exposed to poison ivy . Every single one of them developed a
rash wher e they had been rubbed.
Both the placebo eﬀect and the nocebo eﬀect play a
critical r ole in our ability to unleash our full charisma
potential. Due to the fact that whatever is in our mind
aﬀects our body, and because our mind has tr ouble
distinguishing imagination fr om reality, whatever we
imagine can have an impact on our body language and,
thus, on our levels of charisma. Our imagination can
dramatically enhance or inhibit our charisma, depending on
its content.
You’ve just gained the foundation for many of the most
powerful inter nal charisma tools, and we’ll r efer to it of ten.
KEY T AKEA WAYS
 Charisma has thr ee essential components: pr esence,
power, and war mth.
 Being pr esent—paying attention to what’s going on rather
than being caught up in your thoughts—can yield
immense r ewar ds. When you e xhibit pr esence, those
around you feel listened to, r espected, and valued.
 Because your body language telegraphs your inter nal
state to those ar ound you, in or der to be charismatic—to
exhibit pr esence, power, and war mth—you must display
charismatic body language.
 Because your mind can’t tell the diﬀer ence between
imagination and r eality, by cr eating a charismatic inter nal
state your body language will authentically display
charisma.

 In ter ms of achieving charisma, your inter nal state is
critical. Get the inter nal state right, and the right
charismatic behaviors and body language will pour forth
automatically .
* In fact, Stanfor d resear chers conducted e xperiments showing that when
people try to hide their r eal feelings, they pr ovoke a thr eat-response ar ousal in
others. 5
OceanofPDF .com

3
The Obstacles to Presence,  
Power , and W armth
MICHEL ANGEL O INSISTED THA T he never created  his glorious
statues—he simply revealed  them. His only talent, he said,
was in looking at the block of marble and discer ning the
statue within. All he then needed was the skill to chip away
the e xcess, letting the statue emer ge. That is what this
chapter will help you do: identif y the obstacles that ar e
holding back your charismatic self .
As you now know, your mental state is critical to your
ability to pr oject charismatic body language. However, ther e
are a number of things that can—and of ten do—get in the
way of having the right mental state to pr oject pr esence,
power, or war mth. Incr easing your charisma r equir es ﬁrst
knowing which inter nal obstacles ar e cur rently inhibiting
your personal charisma potential. In this chapter we’ll tak e a
look at the diﬀer ent kinds of physical and mental discomfort
that can stand in the way of your charismatic self .
Physical Discomfort
It was a $4 million deal, and it was nearly lost because of a
black wool suit.
On a hot, sunny day in Manhattan, traﬃc is humming and
people ar e rushing along the busy str eets. Sitting at the
terrace of a r estaurant, wearing his very best black wool
suit, T om is studying the menu. A cross the table, studying

his own menu, is P aul, CEO of a company T om has been
courting for months. As they mak e their choices, the waiter
jots down their or ders, whisks the menus oﬀ the table, and
departs.
For months, T om and his team have obsessively run the
numbers and tested all possible scenarios. They know for
sure that their system would save P aul both time and
money . But for P aul, this would be a big gamble.
Implementing a new system company -wide could go
catastr ophically wr ong. What if it stops working on
Christmas mor ning, when stor es need to be operating
ﬂawlessly? W ould T om and his team be ther e for him if a
crisis hits?
Paul has decided to give T om one ﬁnal shot at convincing
him. F or Tom, this could be a tur ning point in his car eer. He’s
conﬁdent that his system is solid and that he and his team
can deliver . It’s now up to him to communicate this
complete conﬁdence to P aul.
When P aul asks about crisis situations, T om has a r eady
answer . But as he details contingency plans, he starts
ﬁdgeting with his suit, running his ﬁngers inside the rim of
his collar, and P aul can see T om’s eyes nar rowing. Is that
tension in his eyes?  Paul wonders. T om’s e xpression looks
tight and uncomfortable, and P aul starts to get a bad gut
feeling. What’s going on?
Paul was right in seeing tension in T om’s eyes and face,
but that tension had nothing to do with the business matter
at hand. W earing a black woolen suit on a hot, sunny day,
Tom was simply feeling physically  uncomfortable.
What if you had been in T om’s place? Even without the
itchy suit, imagine being on a sunny ter race in the middle of
an important conversation, and suddenly the sun starts
hitting your eyes. When human eyes ar e hit by sunlight,
they automatically tighten or nar row in r eaction. Our eye
muscles r eact in the e xact same way to this kind of e xternal
stimuli as they do to inter nal stimuli. T o the outside world,

your face will show the same r eaction to discomfort fr om
the sun as it would to feelings of anger or disappr oval. This
reaction will be seen by the person facing you, and he or
she may not know about your physical discomfort. All they
know is that they’ve been speaking with you. It would be
natural to misinterpr et your tension as a r eaction to what
they’ve just said.
In fact, that’s pr obably e xactly what will happen, because
most of us tend to interpr et events—whether they’r e
personal or impersonal—as r elating to us. T raﬃc on the way
to an important meeting can lead us to wonder, Why did
this have to happen to  me today?
Any physical discomfort that aﬀects your visible, e xternal
state—your body language—even slightly may aﬀect how
charismatic you ar e per ceived to be. When interacting with
someone, assume that he or she will feel (at least on a
subconscious level) that whatever you do r elates to him or
to her .
Physical discomfort doesn’t just aﬀect your e xternal state;
it also aﬀects your inter nal state. Some for ms of it, such as
hunger, can impair your perfor mance in multiple ways. Y ou
may alr eady know that you think less clearly when you’r e
hungry, or at least less clearly about anything that isn’t
food-r elated. Numer ous studies conﬁr m that low blood
glucose levels lead to impair ed attention as well as to
diﬃculties r egulating emotions and behavior .1 This means
that you might have a har der time getting into the speciﬁc
mental state r equir ed for the charismatic behavior you
would lik e to e xhibit.
Counteracting charisma-impairing physical discomfort is
simple:
1. Prevent
2. Recognize
3. Remedy or e xplain

The ﬁrst, and optimal, step is to plan ahead to pr event the
discomfort fr om occur ring. The classic adage “ An ounce of
prevention is worth a pound of cur e” holds true her e. As
much as you can, plan ahead to ensur e you’r e physically
comfortable. K eeping this in mind as you mak e your choices
every day is a simple way to mak e charisma easier to attain.
When you’r e choosing a location for a meeting, tak e
comfort into consideration. Ask yourself what the
temperatur e and noise level will be lik e. Ensur e that you’ll
be well fed; don’t let yourself (or your guests if you’r e
hosting) get too hungry . Think about your ener gy level, and
the ener gy level of the people with whom you’ll be
interacting. Is the meeting very early or very late? Signs of
fatigue can easily show up in people’s body language as
lack of enthusiasm.
Be sur e to choose clothing that will mak e you neither too
hot nor too cold. A void clothing that is itchy, ill ﬁtting, or in
any way distracting. Though you may not r ealize it, any
physical distraction will use up part of your mental focus
and impair your perfor mance. It’s particularly important to
ensur e that your clothing is loose enough for you to br eathe
well and fully (this means you can tak e deep belly br eaths,
not shallow chest br eaths). How well you br eathe aﬀects
how much o xygen gets to your brain, and ther efore how well
you perfor m mentally .
Admittedly, people may gain valuable conﬁdence, and
therefore charisma, fr om feeling that they look impr essive
even if their clothing is not comfortable. It’s r eally up to you
to decide: is the discomfort worth the gain in conﬁdence?
Ideally, you should wear clothing that mak es you feel both
comfortable and highly conﬁdent in your appearance. Mak e
sure you’r e not sacriﬁcing comfort in small ways that might
actually be holding you back. Y ou’re looking to get every
advantage you can, right?
One young man told me his eyes ar e so sensitive to
sunlight that even when he e xplains the r eal cause of his