

--- PAGE 1 ---


--- PAGE 2 ---


--- PAGE 3 ---
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 4 ---
An imprint of Penguin Random House LLC
375 Hudson Street
New York, New York 10014
Copyright © 2017 by Olivia Fox Cabane and Judah Pollack
Penguin supports copyright. Copyright fuels creativity , encourages diverse voices, promotes free
speech, and creates a vibrant culture. Thank you for buying an authorized edition of this book and for
complying with copyright laws by not reproducing, scanning, or distributing any part of it in any
form without permission. You are supporting writers and allowing Penguin to continue to publish
books for every reader .
Most Portfolio books are available at a discount when purchased in quantity for sales promotions or
corporate use. Special editions, which include personalized covers, excerpts, and corporate imprints,
can be created when purchased in lar ge quantities. For more information, please call (212) 572-2232
or e-mail specialmarkets@penguinrandomhouse.com. Your local bookstore can also assist with
discounted bulk purchases using the Penguin Random House corporate Business-to-Business
program. For assistance in locating a participating retailer , e-mail B2B@penguinrandomhouse.com.
ISBN: 9781591847199 (hardcover)
ISBN: 9780698153448 (ebook)
ISBN: 9780735216778 (international edition)
While the author has made every ef fort to provide accurate telephone numbers, Internet addresses,
and other contact information at the time of publication, neither the publisher nor the author assumes
any responsibility for errors or for changes that occur after publication. Further , the publisher does
not have any control over and does not assume any responsibility for author or third-party Web sites
or their content.
Version_1
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 5 ---
To Dr. Mar cus Raichle, discover er of the default mode network, whose
breakthr ough made our work possible, whose science underlies this entir e
book, and for whose guidance we ar e profoundly grateful.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 6 ---
Contents
Title Page
Copyright
Dedication
Introduction
Part One
The Butterflies
Chapter 1
The Four  Wings
Chapter 2
The Chrysalis
Chapter 3
On the Hunt
Chapter 4
The Butterfly Pr ocess
Chapter 5
Cultivating Your Garden
Chapter 6
What’ s in Your Net?

--- PAGE 7 ---
Part Two
The Blockers
Chapter 7
The Spiders of Fear
Chapter 8
The Failur e Wasps
Chapter 9
Icy Uncertainty
Chapter 10
The SuperT ools
Chapter  Summaries
Key Exer cises
Science Appendix
Recommended Resour ces
Acknowledgments
Notes
Index
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 8 ---
I n t r o d u c t i o n
IN A SMALL  city in Switzerland on a fine spring day in 1905, a young patent
clerk left his one-year -old son and wife at home to go see his best friend
about a riddle. The two friends loved exchanging ideas, from philosophy to
physics, from art to electricity , and this morning our young patent clerk
wanted to discuss a problem that had been vexing him for some time.
For the past year , he’d been especially focused on a physics theory he’d
begun formulating ten years ago. He laid out every detail of the problem he
had been struggling with, and for an entire day the two friends analyzed
ideas and rehashed every aspect of the dilemma.
As the sun set, the young man finally concluded that the theory he’d
been working on for a decade was going nowhere. It had hit a brick wall.
Demoralized and dejected, he declared that he was giving up the entire
quest. And so Albert Einstein shuf fled home and went to sleep.
You can imagine his friend’ s surprise the next morning when,
answering an ur gent knock, he opened the door to see Einstein, who
bypassed polite greetings and blurted out, “Thank you. I’ve completely
solved the problem.” With that, he returned home and began to write.
Einstein spent the next six weeks writing out one of the most important
scientific contributions of all time: the special theory of relativity .1
What happened inside Einstein’ s brain that night? After years of ef fort,
why did the answer suddenly appear just when he had given up?
Einstein’ s experience was a classic example of the way our brain
creates breakthrough ideas, completely new and novel ways of solving
problems and looking at the world. And believe it or not, if you’ve ever had
a breakthrough, the exact same thing happened inside your brain, too.

--- PAGE 9 ---
This process was deliberately , consciously used by both Salvador Dali
and Thomas Edison. Dali would put his elbow on a table and rest his chin
on his upturned palm with a spoon between his chin and his palm. He
would let himself drift of f to sleep. As his muscles relaxed, the spoon would
drop and rattle against the table, waking him up. Dali would then sketch the
exact concept in his mind at that moment. Edison had a strikingly similar
habit of napping in his chair with a handful of marbles. The moment the
marbles’  clatter woke him up, he would write down whatever was in his
mind.2
For many , breakthroughs are like butterflies—beautiful and awe-
inspiring, yet erratic and elusive. Some people think they happen through
hard work and concentration. The harder you focus on the breakthrough
you’re seeking, the more likely you are to get it. Others think they are
spontaneous, inexplicable, and unpredictable. We describe these moments
of inspiration as “eureka” or “aha” moments, or we speak of “having a
lightbulb go of f.” They’re purely accidental, and there’ s no way to induce
them. Still others believe they are for the lucky and the extraordinary . The
truth is that we all can have breakthroughs.
In fact, breakthroughs are not accidental, they can be induced, and we
are going to show you how . Thanks to new neuroscience research, we now
know how the breakthrough process works and we have tools to access it.3
Breakthroughs, like butterflies, may fly an unpredictable path, but it is
possible to capture them if we build the right net.
Advances in neuroscience have revealed that these seemingly
unpredictable, sudden, and singular flashes are actually a predictable part of
an integrated mental process.4 Einstein described the breakthrough moment
as arriving “suddenly , and in a rather intuitive way . That means it is not
reached by conscious logical conclusions.”5 But this sudden flash of insight
is actually the only visible step of a much longer process, and Einstein
knew it. “Thinking it through afterwards, you can always discover the
reasons. . . . Intuition is nothing but the outcome of earlier intellectual
experience.”
Every single person on the planet has the ability to generate creative
breakthroughs inside their brains: you can’ t be born without it. We all have
a natural ability to create butterflies. However , you may not know how to

--- PAGE 10 ---
get the most out of it, or even how to access it. You need skills and practice
to build and wield a net.
Breakthrough thinkers impact the world, whether they’re Louis Pasteur ,
Steve Jobs, or Mahatma Gandhi. Breakthroughs advance science and
civilization. Breakthrough thinking gave us modern medicine, from Velcro6
to the pacemaker .7 The power of breakthrough thinking is equally valuable
at home: you could have a breakthrough about what’ s been holding you
back from getting into a relationship, or what you need to fix in your
marriage.
Breakthrough thinking is also critical in business: innovation
breakthroughs are worth millions, sometimes billions. Right now ,
companies are spending time and ef fort to create a culture of innovation
breakthroughs around their employees. But what about the inside of their
employees’  heads? As it turns out, even if your employees are surrounded
by an innovative or ganization or culture, if their mental  culture isn’ t
conducive, potential breakthroughs will never be realized.
Are you being asked to be far more creative at work than you signed on
for? Does your path forward in your career suddenly depend on your ability
to be innovative? Has breakthrough thinking become an expectation rather
than an aspiration? Whether you already have regular breakthroughs and
want to be able to direct them, or think that you just don’ t have that kind of
brain, we have good news: breakthrough thinking is a skill that you can
acquire and practice.
In the following pages, you are going to learn all about how your
brain’ s breakthrough process works, how to access it, what might be
holding it back, and how to turbochar ge it.
We do, however , want to be clear: we will not be giving you a magic
formula. Owning a net isn’ t sufficient to catch butterflies: you need
practice, patience, skill, and a little luck. Because the breakthrough
experience varies by individual, there is no guaranteed step-by-step
procedure. No one breakthrough looks exactly like any other; they all
emer ge through their own unique process. That’ s why the breakthrough
experience is not a directed, repeatable, linear one, but rather an evolving,
unfolding, creative process with many dif ferent elements.

--- PAGE 11 ---
What we are giving you is a framework and a set of tools to increase
the chances of breakthroughs. There’ s a common saying that “luck is
preparation meets opportunity .” In this book, you’ll learn how to prepare
yourself so you can make the most of the opportunities that present
themselves. We offer you tools and techniques from a broad range of
disciplines—from behavioral and cognitive psychology to neuroscience and
meditation, from peak performance athletic conditioning to Hollywood
Method acting. In this sense, breakthrough thinking is like mixed martial
arts, taking the most ef fective tools from anywhere, valuing ef fectiveness
over style. This book helps you put the science into practice so that you can
accelerate your learning curve.
We know that a person’ s breakthrough level can be increased with the
right methods because we’ve helped countless clients increase theirs in this
way. We’ve brought these breakthrough tools to the U.S. Army Special
Forces and to Stanford’ s Student Enterprise Accelerator , StartX, in the heart
of Silicon Valley .
Through these tools our clients have experienced breakthroughs in
areas as disparate as predicting the political outcome of the Arab Spring,
creating new medical technology devices, or breaking through executive
team deadlocks. They’ve reported astonishing results that have transformed
their practices, and you’ll find some of their stories in the pages that follow .
We have both been fascinated with breakthroughs for decades, and in
our pursuit of breakthroughs, we’ve tried some crazy stuf f. We’ve studied
sports psychology , Jungian archetypes, depth hypnosis, sensory deprivation,
cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT), mindfulness-based cognitive therapy
(MBCT), acceptance and commitment therapy (ACT), and an entire
alphabet soup of other acronym-worthy experiences. Just as we’ve passed
on the best insights and tools to our clients, we’re now giving them to you.
In this book, you’ll find unique knowledge drawn from a variety of
sciences and the techniques you need to apply this knowledge. Your life
will become your lab, and you’ll get infinite opportunities to experiment.
Becoming a breakthrough thinker does involve work—work that is
sometimes hard, uncomfortable, and confronting. But it’ s also incredibly
rewarding.
There is no substitute for doing the exercises in this book. Skimming
through them with the earnest intention of completing them “another day”

--- PAGE 12 ---
is not enough, nor is doing only the exercises that seem easy or interesting.
When an exercise asks you to close your eyes and imagine a scene, really
close your eyes and imagine. When we ask you to write out a scenario, grab
a pen and paper and write. If we ask you to do something, it’ s for a good
reason, and it will have a real impact on your level of breakthrough
thinking.
In part one, we’ll talk about what breakthroughs are (and aren’ t) and
look at the inner workings of your brain’ s breakthrough process. This is
where you’ll get to feel your breakthrough network in action, and learn to
tell the dif ference between the various modes your brain can switch into.
Then we’ll lay out the breakthrough experience for you. You’ll learn
how to get yourself into the right mental state and collect the facts, stories,
knowledge, and experiences needed to fuel your creative process.
You’ll learn how to turbochar ge your brain’ s breakthrough power by
increasing your level of neuroplasticity , using your brain’ s ability to
constantly rewire itself every time you think a new thought.
Putting It into Practice: A Thirty-Second Neuroplasticity Booster
Every time you think a new thought, all over your brain new structures are created. Yes, really .
Want to know what that feels like? Here you go.
Trace your route to work in your head. Be as specific as you can: imagine the signs, the
landmarks, the streetlights and traf fic signs. Imagine making the turns you would have to make,
the buildings, stores, or restaurants you would pass by .
That feeling of trying to assemble images in your mind, of or ganizing them in the right order ,
the slightly awkward feeling of doing something for the first time? That’ s neuroplasticity at work.
Your brain is physically creating new structures.
In part two, we’ll talk about your butterflies’  natural predators: the
forces that prevent breakthroughs from happening inside your mind. Did
you know that the three leading causes of butterfly demise are spiders,
wasps, and cold? They have equivalents inside your brain: the spiders of
fear, the wasps of failure, and the icy cold of uncertainty . Fear, failure, and
uncertainty are the breakthrough blockers that can trap your insights and
limit your potential. There are breakthroughs you could be having, right
now, that are trapped inside your mind, just waiting to be released. With the

--- PAGE 13 ---
right techniques, you can neutralize these negative forces and let your
butterflies soar . (If you can’ t wait to get started, jump straight to here.)
Finally , in the last chapter we’ll talk about the SuperT ools—tools that
will superchar ge all areas of your breakthrough process. And for the nerds
among you, we’ve included more information about the brain science of
breakthroughs in the Science Appendix.
By using the tools in this book, you will open the door to your brain’ s
ability to cut through the noise and see your brilliant breakthrough ideas.
These breakthroughs could change your business, your personal life, your
physical and emotional well-being, your learning agility , your perspective
on the world, your perception of yourself. Exponentially and incrementally ,
it could change anything or everything about you and who you are. To have
breakthroughs, you don’ t have to be special. You don’ t have to be brilliant.
You don’ t have to be privileged or even well educated. All you have to
know is what you’re looking for and how to find it.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 14 ---
Part One
The Butterflies
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 15 ---
Chapter 1
                  
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 16 ---
The Four Wings
All About Breakthroughs
YET  ANOTHER DROP  of ink leaked from his fountain pen onto the page, and
László Bíró threw down his pen in disgust. A Hungarian newspaper editor
who earned his salary by writing, he was frustrated with the tools of his
trade. He seemed to spend his time either filling up his fountain pens, or
cleaning up the smudges they made.1
Of course he was grateful for the invention of the fountain pen: it was a
vast improvement over feather quills. But it still meant ink splotches and
ruined pages that had to be written all over again.
Why couldn’ t the ink from his fountain be more like the ink used to
print his newspaper? Bíró already knew the answer: newspaper ink was
much too thick for his fountain pen. Right ink, wrong pen. Deciding to use
the newspaper ink was a good idea. But it wasn’ t a breakthrough.
The breakthrough came with a new way to deliver the ink. Rather than
trying to get the thick ink to flow through a nib, Bíró and his brother figured
out how to set a metal ball in a socket and let the thick ink roll out from
behind the ball.
Now let’ s be clear—ballpoint pens had been attempted before. They
just hadn’ t worked until then. Early ballpoints did not deliver the ink
evenly; overflow and clogging were just two of the many issues that made
them impractical. The breakthrough came when Bíró made the ballpoint
pen viable.
In business, a breakthrough is often described as an idea that solves a
problem or satisfies a need in an entirely new way . Although there is no
single definition of breakthroughs, we define them quite simply as the
moment when you break thr ough  something that was previously limiting
you, whether it’ s a specific problem you couldn’ t find a solution to, a
situation you couldn’ t understand, or simply an old way of doing or seeing
things.

--- PAGE 17 ---
Sociologist and author Martha Beck describes the experience of
breakthrough as “a shift in your understanding of the world, because the
lens through which you view the world has been suddenly , gloriously
changed. And boy , do breakthroughs feel amazing.”2 A breakthrough is a
sudden advance in your knowledge or understanding that moves you past a
barrier and makes you see things, understand things in a new way . Although
all breakthroughs come from the same process in the brain, not all
breakthroughs come in the same way .
There are two main kinds of breakthroughs: intentional and
unintentional. You’ll face some of the same obstacles with both, but these
obstacles will play out in dif ferent ways. Fear , for instance, impedes both
intentional and unintentional breakthroughs—but it rears its ugly head at
different stages of the breakthrough experience. For intentional
breakthroughs, fear interferes before the breakthrough, bringing up the
possibility of failure.
Fear seeps in after unintentional breakthroughs, and it centers on the
oncoming challenges of implementing a solution. For instance, you
suddenly realize (breakthrough) that you need a divorce. Anxiety might
arise as you foresee the unpleasantness that all too often accompanies the
process (implementation) of divorcing.
Or perhaps you suddenly realize (breakthrough) you’ve fallen in love
with a close friend. You could fear being rejected after making your new
feelings known (implementation), or , confusingly , fear success and the life
changes it would entail.
For unintentional breakthroughs, landing on a solution isn’ t the end
goal: you need to act on it. As Beck says, “Having breakthroughs isn’ t the
point. Living them is. Seeing in a new way is only the beginning.” Fear is a
powerful saboteur of this process.
Although all breakthroughs come from the same process in the brain,
not all breakthroughs come in the same way . We have identified four
different types: eureka breakthrough, metaphorical breakthrough, intuitive
breakthrough, and paradigm breakthrough. Understanding the dif ferent
kinds of breakthroughs will help you spot them so you don’ t miss a single
one. It will also help you discover the style, or styles, that are most natural
to you so you can learn to focus on the way that works best for you.

--- PAGE 18 ---
The key is to understand that no style of breakthrough is better or more
productive than another . It is simply best to understand which style or styles
come most naturally to you.
Eureka Br eakthr ough
Eureka translates from the Greek as “I’ve got it” or “That’ s it.” In popular
culture, it has come to describe the moment when someone experiences a
sudden, unexpected realization.
Archimedes, the original “Eureka!” shouter , was a Greek
mathematician and scientist living in ancient Sicily in the third century B.C.
One day , he was asked by King Hiero, ruler of the city-state, to determine
whether a crown was made of real gold. Since gold had a known density , all
he had to do was measure the density of the crown and see whether it
matched up.
The first part of measuring density was easy: determine the crown’ s
weight. But the second part required measuring the crown’ s exact volume.
Now , measuring the volume of an object like a cube is simple. But how do
you determine the volume of an object as irregularly shaped as a crown?
Archimedes puzzled on the problem until one day while taking a bath.
As he stepped into the bathtub, he watched the water rise, displaced by his
leg. He realized that, just as the water had risen to accommodate the new
volume of his leg, it would rise in response to the volume of the crown. So
he could submer ge the crown and measure the amount of water displaced to
know the crown’ s volume, and thus calculate its density . He cried “Eureka!”
and jumped out of his bath and ran through the streets of Syracuse stark
naked, shouting all the way .
We tend to have eureka insights when we’ve been mulling over a
problem for some time. Take, for example, the time two helicopter
mechanics in the Army Reserve saved the army tens of millions of dollars
because of their shared love of NASCAR.3
During the Iraq War, desert sand and dust were damaging helicopter
windshields faster than the army could replace them, and costing hundreds
of thousands of dollars every month. Lexan, the shatter -resistant plastic the
windshields were made of, tended to scratch easily .

--- PAGE 19 ---
As it happens, Lexan is also used to make NASCAR windshields. But
to solve the scratching problem, NASCAR drivers had learned to cover
their windshields with thin sheets of transparent Mylar film they called
“tearaways.” At the end of each race, the used Mylar sheet is torn of f, and
the Lexan windshield underneath is left without a scratch.
Two national guardsmen on a helicopter maintenance crew in Virginia
happened to be big NASCAR fans. As they surveyed the extent of the
damage done to their helicopters’  Lexan windshields, they were hit with the
possibility that NASCAR’ s solution could solve the army’ s problem.
Creatively reapplying an existing solution is a common type of eureka
insight. In fact, NASCAR first borrowed the Mylar technique from
motorcycle racers protecting their helmets.
When eureka breakthroughs happen, they happen fast. They are the
proverbial lightning bolt over the head. Many people report the sensation of
receiving information from a location “above.” And this sudden discovery
of an immediately applicable solution is incredibly exciting.
Eureka insights are the ones that your author Olivia gets most often
(she’ s ruthlessly pragmatic). These ideas arrive with a clear mental picture
of how to execute them and the confidence that they’ll work.
They are most likely to come when you have been living with a
problem or a block. This problem is interfering with your peace of mind;
you think about it often during the day . But the actual breakthrough will
most likely occur when you’re no longer thinking about the problem.
James Watt did not invent the steam engine.4 In 1764, at the University
of Glasgow , he was repairing what was known as a Newcomen steam
engine, which Watt considered very inef ficient. He worked on the problem
until one spring day in 1765, he was walking through a park when the
breakthrough came to him: he needed two cylinders.5 Eureka! Watt’s
breakthrough made the engine so much more powerful and ef ficient that it
ushered in the true age of steam.
A century later , the next great breakthrough in power occurred in a
remarkably similar way . Nikola Tesla had been working on the concept of
an alternating current motor for a few years. One day while walking
through a park in Budapest he had a feverish vision of an alternating current

--- PAGE 20 ---
motor complete with three slightly out of phase magnetic fields turning the
drive shaft.6 The solution had appeared fully formed. Eureka!
This is part of the grand paradox of breakthrough thinking. In order to
have a eureka breakthrough, you have to be deeply immersed in a problem.
But then you have to let go of it, let your mind wander of f and go do
something else. It’ s while you’re otherwise engaged, and not focused on the
problem, that you will be rewarded with a eureka breakthrough. How to
switch between these two modes—focus and lack of focus—is one of the
most important things this book will teach you.
“In my experience, eureka moments happen when we face a high level
of pressure,” explains Victoria Spadaro-Grant, CT O of pasta behemoth
Barilla and one of Olivia’ s favorite clients, “whether the pressure is
generated as a by-product of a self-imposed challenge or the result of
external circumstances.”7
When Barilla CEO Claudio Colzani, concerned by the increasing
consumption of saturated fats reported by the World Health Or ganization,
ordered a massive reduction in saturated fats across Barilla’ s entire bakery
portfolio, Spadaro-Grant faced a “massive challenge.” As head of Research
and Development for the Barilla Group, she was in char ge of reformulating
the portfolio and bringing it to market within five months. “At the time, we
did not know how to solve the technical challenge of delivering the same
eating experience with less saturated fat, not to mention implementing new
manufacturing processes and addressing the multimillion euro cost and
profitability impact.”
With the clock ticking, Spadaro-Grant assembled “a SW AT team of
only six people who were eager to try , test, break rules, and make bold
decisions. We realized that with such a short time frame, we had to throw
the old rule book completely out the window . That realization led to new
margins of tolerance across technical solutions, manufacturing setups,
formulation costs, and marketing communications. As simple as this
sounds, this was the way we changed technical paradigms about how to use
fats in our bakery .” Eureka!

--- PAGE 21 ---
Metaphorical Br eakthr ough
In 1782, there was no such thing as a bullet: guns did not shoot small,
tapered missiles, but rather lumps of lead known as “shot.“ Most people
produced shot by rolling out a sheet of molten lead, waiting for it to cool,
and then chopping it up. This wasn’ t very ef fective in producing smooth
spheres: the projectiles were misshapen, pitted, or even completely
perforated.
As a result, it was nearly impossible for anyone to shoot straight.
Because of their irregular shape, the slugs would catch the wind and curve
like a paper airplane; their trajectory was always unpredictable. In 1782,
hitting your tar get had more to do with luck than with aim. Since England
was in the business of ruling the world at the time, and in the midst of a war
with its pesky American colonies, the ability to shoot straight was of great
interest.
Producing shot was also expensive, time consuming, and labor
intensive. After the chopping method, people tried pouring molten lead into
spherical molds. Unfortunately , the cooling process tended to create of f-
center spheres, and in addition air bubbles left deep, random pits.
Enter William Watts. A prosperous plumber living in a three-story
house in the town of Bristol, England, Watts experienced a week of
particularly troublesome sleep. Night after night he was puzzled by the
same dream: He was walking along a street when it began to rain—only it
wasn’ t raining water , it was raining lead. The drops of lead piled up around
his feet. When Watts bent down to pick one up, he saw that it was a
perfectly round sphere, the ideal lead shot everyone was chasing after . Watts
was dreaming about the perfect product falling from the sky . But what did it
mean? Day after day he pondered that question in vain.8
After a few days, tired from lack of sleep at night and from puzzling
over the dream during the day , Watts went for a walk. As he went down the
street he had a flash of insight and suddenly understood the meaning of his
dream. He ran home and set to work.
Watts added three floors to his house, making it six stories high. He cut
holes in each floor , one atop the other , and put a water tank at the bottom.
Then he stood at the top of this shaft with a copper sieve and a bucket of
molten lead. He poured the liquid lead through the sieve and watched as

--- PAGE 22 ---
lead droplets fell the length of the shaft, landing in the cool water below
with a hiss.
He ran downstairs, dipped his hand into the well, and pulled up a
handful of beautifully round lead shot. The even pull of gravity in the
stillness of the airshaft had produced perfect spheres. Watts had invented a
process to make it rain bullets, turning his dream into reality . Patented in
1783, these “shot towers,” as they came to be known, sprang up all over
England, Europe, and America.
Watts’s mind had presented him with a solution indirectly: his brain
came up with an analogy and shared it through a dream. Watts dreamed that
he was walking in a rain of little lead pellets, had the same dream for a
week without knowing what to make of it, then finally had a revelation, and
the insight that his mind was trying to communicate became clear .
Metaphorical insights aren’ t as direct as eureka insights. Answers come
to you first as metaphors or analogies, and you must interpret their images
before the breakthrough is complete. With Archimedes’  eureka insight, the
answer came fully formed. There was no need to interpret a metaphor: the
submersion of his leg was a direct correlation to the submersion of the
crown.
If Watts’s insight had been a eureka insight, he would have seen a
concrete solution: an image of a tower , of drops of metal falling and being
shaped into spheres by friction with the air , landing in water , and cooling
down. It would have been a one-to-one correlation. Instead, he had a dream
about rain, and then saw that the drops of rain were drops of lead. It was
raining lead. The elements were there: the lead, the fall, the water . But there
wasn’ t a direct correlation; a process of interpretation was necessary .
Sometimes, your brain needs to work through various levels of
comprehension before you can connect a wordless intuition to a real-life
problem. Metaphor works like a wormhole: it can connect things that
appear to be incredibly far apart, and it can overlay a pattern on things that
appear to be unconnected. Unlike their eureka cousins, metaphorical
breakthroughs can be had about subjects we’re barely familiar with, like a
plumber having an insight about ammunition.
Such insights are often embedded in bizarre dreams. Celebrated
inventor Elias Howe dreamed that he was captured by a primitive tribe and
held at spear point. Howe, admirably unperturbed in his dream, noticed that

--- PAGE 23 ---
the spearheads had holes in them. Thus was discovered the secret to the
lock stitch sewing machine—placing a hole on the pointy end of the needle.
The improvement in stitching speed revolutionized the clothing industry .9
This metaphoric type of insight is also the basis of a process known as
biomimicry . In biomimicry , we look for designs already existing in nature
that could be useful in a human context. You may have heard that Velcro
was discovered by mimicking sticky burrs. But did you know that the
tenacious, watertight glue that oysters and barnacles use to adhere to rocks
has inspired new ways for sur geons to close wounds on human beings?10
The Wright Brothers originally studied the flight of birds to gain
insights into how to control powered flight. They noticed the birds twisted
their wing tips to keep their balance. But on their lightweight plane,
pivoting wing tips would be too fragile. Wilbur Wright, who owned a
bicycle shop, had a long inner -tube box in his hands one day . He was
absentmindedly twisting the box when the breakthrough suddenly came to
him. If the entire wing twisted, you could control flight. His discovery came
to be called “wing warping” and was the breakthrough that set the age of
aviation in motion.11
We have found metaphorical breakthroughs to be a powerful tool when working with
leaders. The executive team of a very successful Silicon Valley company asked us to sit in
on their meeting when they were facing a block. They had had great success with their core
product but could feel their well-funded competitors breathing down their neck. Should
they double down on what they were already doing and try to own the market, or should
they expand into a more unknown, adjacent area?
The executive team talked and talked. They used logic and linear ar guments and lots
and lots of words. Some ar gued they should stay with what they know . Their investors
trusted them, their customers trusted them, and they’d spent a lot of time and money
building their brand in that direction. Others ar gued that this was innovate-or -die time, that
they had no choice but to spread their wings and fly into the unknown. That’ s what made
companies great. There was a not-so-subtle hint that the other side lacked the courage to be
great. That did not go over well. Those ar guing to stick with the known product dug in and
made their same ar guments only more forcefully . Around and around they went, all the time
banging up against walls.
Judah went up to the big whiteboard in the front of the room and drew two lar ge boxes.
He then split the executive team into their opposing groups, gave them pens, and ordered
them to draw pictures of their visions of the future. At first there was grumbling and
protests that they didn’ t know how to draw . Olivia assured them that stick figures were
perfectly acceptable. Slowly , the teams began to work.

--- PAGE 24 ---
When the executives finished there was something striking about their two pictures:
they weren’ t very dif ferent. Both groups drew a road winding to the horizon, happy faces
along the road, and signposts at certain intervals. The farther along the roads you went the
more happy faces there were. At first everyone was confused. If their pictures were so
similar , why were they ar guing?
As each team described their drawings the dif ferences became crystal clear . One group
drew bends in the road to represent how they’d have to react to the market. The other group
drew bends in the road to represent how they wanted to get ahead  of the market. The room
got quiet for moment. A clarity had emer ged. In this case the metaphor broke through the
disagreement and posturing to reveal the essence of the issue. The group that wanted to
stick with the core product and then react to the market saw clearly that they were reacting
out of fear . The decision was made to move into the adjacent field. Three years on and the
decision has proved a rousing success.
Visual thinking is a common trait among breakthrough thinkers. Many of the people we
interviewed carry small sketch pads with them at all times. When they first put their idea to
paper it is often as an image or a series of images. Visual thinking accesses dif ferent parts
of the brain than language and logical ar gument. And it can be even more powerful when
you are not very good at drawing because it forces you to be less literal and more
metaphorical.
Intuitive Br eakthr ough
Imagine a dry lake bed in the high desert of California. This vast wasteland,
offering little more than hard red earth, dust, and heat, was the spot the
miltary had chosen in 1947 for its top-secret supersonic test flights. The
plane being tested, the Bell X-1, was shaped like a bullet, with wafer -thin
wings. The U.S. Air Force was experimenting with rocket planes to finally
crack the sound barrier .
Unfortunately , every time pilots got close to the speed of sound, their
planes’  controls would freeze up, their rudders wouldn’ t move, and they’d
be tossed around as if flying through a storm. It wasn’ t pretty: one plane
completely disintegrated. The engineers were wringing their hands. No pilot
had yet survived flying even 85 percent of the necessary speed, and the
death toll was mounting.12
Chuck Yeager , a country boy from West Virginia, was one of the air
force’ s very best pilots. At barely twenty-four years old, Yeager was already
a legend. Thanks to his World War II exploits, he was known as an ace
fighter pilot who seemed to have been born to fly .

--- PAGE 25 ---
During practice runs, Yeager had experienced all the usual dif ficulties
as he approached the speed of sound: loss of controls, the plane shaking and
wobbling, the entire aircraft tossed around in the wind like a rag doll. And
yet, despite this evidence, Yeager was convinced that the closer he got to
the sound barrier , the easier flying would be.
How could he be so sure? Aerospace engineering barely had a name
yet, and he was up against PhDs who safely combined liquid oxygen,
cooled to 297 degrees below zero, with ethyl alcohol, and then managed to
contain the resulting explosion in a way that created propulsion. They were
certain that they had run up against the limits of physics, and that flirting
with the sound barrier was a suicide mission.
Yet here was Yeager , the son of a gas driller , with only a high school
education, certain that he could make it. He had nothing but an intuition, a
hunch so strong he was willing to bet his life on it. He somehow knew  it
would work.
On the fateful morning of October 14, 1947, Chuck Yeager climbed
aboard the Bell X-1 and slid into the cockpit. He and his plane were
dropped out of the belly of a converted B-29 bomber and rocketed straight
up into the sky .
As he approached .9 Mach (90 percent of the necessary speed), the
plane tossed and rolled and the controls became unresponsive. But when he
reached .96 Mach he informed the ground that he had regained control of
the airplane. The country boy had out-predicted the PhDs.
And then all of a sudden, the needle on the machometer fluctuated, then
abruptly jumped clear of f the scale. On the ground, they heard the famous
“sonic boom.” Not only had the plane gotten easier to fly , once it got close
enough, the plane simply leapt across the sound barrier .
How did Yeager know? And how was he sure enough to risk his life?
Intuitive breakthroughs defy logic or explanation. Most of the time, when
people experience intuitive breakthroughs they don’ t know why their
solution will work, they just know that it will.
Achieving a certain level of mastery in one’ s line of work or craft opens
the door to deep insights. Research fellow Tammy Sanders describes
intuition as “a nebulous and inexplicable sense of knowing, flowing from
expertise and guided by environmental cues.”13 This is the kind of insight

--- PAGE 26 ---
that comes to tinkerers, model builders, and product designers. Without
even realizing it, you’ve loaded up thousands of facts, experiences, and case
studies over the course of your life, and they’re sitting in the back of your
mind.
Thomas Edison, the ultimate tinkerer , invented the phonograph with an
intuitive breakthrough. As he tinkered with a prototelephone, on a whim, he
touched a pinpoint to the vibrating diaphragm he was working with. He had
an intuition that, as he spoke, the pinpoint would create indentations in the
tinfoil beneath the diaphragm. When the pinpoint played back through the
track in the tinfoil, it would vibrate the pin, reproducing the sound. He was
right.14
Although both eureka and intuitive breakthroughs are characterized by
a sense of certainty , there is a finality to a eureka breakthrough; you’ve
arrived at your goal. Intuitive breakthroughs, on the other hand, tend to be
more of a beginning; they set you on the path toward the goal. Don’ t expect
a sudden flash of insight. You will, however , experience a quiet calming of
the mind and body . It’s as though you were standing at a crossroads and
suddenly just knew to take the road on the left.
If you’re scratching your head, thinking that intuitive breakthroughs
don’t sound like breakthroughs at all, they’re probably not your personal
style of breakthrough. If, on the other hand, you read this section and felt
truly understood, this might be your native breakthrough style.
Do you have to be more confident to handle an intuitive insight than a
eureka insight? Yes. You have to ascribe legitimacy to a feeling you can’ t
explain, rationalize, or prove.
Leaders must communicate their intuitive breakthroughs clearly and concretely to gain
appropriate support in their or ganizations. But intuition can be dif ficult to talk about.
Two-star general Dana Pittard was the commanding of ficer of the army’ s 1st Armored
Division at Fort Bliss in El Paso, Texas. He was in char ge of forty thousand people and a
massive amount of firepower . So it was odd for Judah, when working with the general and
his staf f, to hear whispers about the general planting “Charlie Brown Christmas trees” all
over the post. Going on his own intuition, Judah asked about the Christmas trees.
After an awkward silence, the general explained that one of his goals was to make Fort
Bliss, an army post lar ger than the state of Rhode Island in the desert of west Texas, a zero-
waste facility . Planting trees for soil and water retention as well as shade was part of that
mission. It was at this point that the chief of operations said, “Sir , they just look sad along
the side of the road. Like rows and rows of Charlie Brown Christmas trees.”

--- PAGE 27 ---
Judah asked the general what he saw when he looked at the rows of sad little trees along
the road. The general stared of f for a few moments. And then it was as if he realized that no
one else was seeing what he was seeing. He understood he needed to communicate his
intuition.
“I see those trees thirty years in the future. They’re spreading their leaves wide across
the boulevards providing shade; their thick roots are traveling deep into the ground. Birds
and squirrels are making their homes in the branches. As the leaves give of f their moisture
they cool the sidewalks so more people will walk.”
As the general described the post of the future, his staf f nodded their heads. But they
still were not bought in. Judah could tell from the combination of the general’ s conviction,
yet still vague description, that he had had an intuitive breakthrough. He knew something
about the future that went beyond his environmental concern; he just couldn’ t quite
communicate what it was. That’ s the paradox of intuitive breakthroughs. There was
something more to the general’ s vision than a description of trees. But what was it?
When the group reconvened, Judah asked General Pittard why he was focused on
making Fort Bliss a zero-waste post. The general grew very animated. “That’ s just it. Our
military runs on ener gy, and right now that ener gy comes from oil. That dependence is a
security risk, both from other countries and the environment. Don’ t you see,” he said to his
staff, “it’ s not about the trees. We could have a more peaceful world, a more secure world
in thirty years, by changing how we draw ener gy from the world. The trees are just a first
step we can take right now in that direction.”
General Pittard was trying to help the military see the inevitability and intelligence of
going green. It was an intuitive idea. We may not know if it worked for another thirty years.
But his explanation helped his staf f understand what his intuition was about (though the
Charlie Brown moniker stuck).
Remember , no one style of breakthrough is better than another . Some
people experience breakthroughs across multiple styles, and others have a
deep relationship with just one. The key is to know which one or two are
yours, and to work to cultivate those.
Paradigm Br eakthr ough
The names associated with paradigm breakthrough are legendary: Newton,
Einstein, Heisenber g, Darwin. This is the kind of breakthrough that af fects
all of humanity and changes the way we see the world.
Paradigm breakthrough is a deep insight about a system of thought that
fundamentally changes the rules we assign to that system. When Newton
watched an apple fall to the ground and realized that the same force that
pulled the apple down was also governing the heavenly bodies, he
revolutionized a system.

--- PAGE 28 ---
While eureka breakthroughs and paradigm breakthroughs both tend to
arrive in a clear , straightforward fashion, they dif fer in the type of content
they deliver . Paradigm breakthroughs will reveal a grand theory , universal
laws, an explanation of multiple phenomena without any immediate
concrete application. Eureka breakthroughs, on the other hand, deliver a
concrete, immediately applicable answer to a specific problem.
You’ll also feel dif ferent, physically and mentally , after experiencing
these two types of breakthroughs. Eureka breakthroughs deliver a rush of
excitement and newfound ener gy. We heard a story about a scientist who
was driving of f the NASA  campus at the end of the day when a thorny
problem suddenly resolved itself—a eureka breakthrough. He stopped his
car in the middle of the road, got out, and ran back to his of fice.
For the rest of the afternoon, his fellow NASA  employees simply drove
around his car on their way out, swerving extra wide to avoid the driver ’s
side door , which he had left open. Even if you’re a generally responsible
person, having a eureka breakthrough will bring out the absentminded
professor in you.
Paradigm breakthroughs, although far greater in their impact, are a
calmer personal experience. They may bring about a sense of awe and
wonder rather than excitement. They might be immensely intellectually
satisfying, but not necessarily valuable in the financial or practical sense.
And they often require additional work to be fully developed, as in the case
of Einstein’ s theory of relativity , which was too complex to have “occurred”
to him in its entirety in one moment. Einstein actually spent six whole
weeks writing out his theory . The experience was more drawn out than we
typically think necessary for breakthroughs, as if the magnitude of the idea
was too much to take in all at once.
Paradigm breakthroughs are the most rarely occurring type, and the
most powerful. But they have as much to do with luck and timing as they
have to do with a single person’ s abilities. Einstein’ s paradigm
breakthrough came at the end of a long line of smaller breakthroughs going
back at least a hundred years, from Alessandro Volta’s discovery and
description of electrical properties to James Clerk Maxwell’ s more precise
definition of these properties to Albert Michelson and Edward Morley
disproving the existence of aether and more accurately confirming the

--- PAGE 29 ---
speed of light, to Ludwig Boltzmann defending the concept of atoms, and
finally to Max Planck discovering the law of quanta.
Every single one of these discoveries, these smaller breakthroughs, was
a prerequisite for Einstein’ s paradigm breakthrough. This series of
breakthroughs is what Einstein was describing when speaking of his
“earlier intellectual experience.”15 Einstein lived at a moment in history
ripe for a paradigm shift. He truly “stood on the shoulders of giants.”
This is not to take away from Einstein’ s genius, but it’ s important to
recognize the role of external factors in creating a paradigm breakthrough.
And while they may seem like the Holy Grail of breakthroughs, it’ s
something one should neither focus on nor strive after .
The allure of the paradigm breakthrough is obvious. Everyone will
know your name. Your face will adorn the walls of dorm rooms. But
paradigm shifters don’ t set out to shift paradigms—a lesson many
innovators would do well to learn.
Many people get lost down a rabbit hole chasing a paradigm-shifting
idea. NASA  scientist Peter Cheeseman talks about seeing colleagues go
chasing after the essence of quantum mechanics and never returning.
Artificial intelligence expert, serial entrepreneur , and angel investor Barney
Pell calls the phenomenon “smart people, stupid problem.”16 Olivia’ s
scientist father recalls: “For the first ten years after my PhD, I was chasing
the Nobel Prize and got nowhere. Then I gave up, and finally started doing
good science.”
Once again, it’ s important to see the dif ferent types of breakthroughs as
equally desirable, and you must trust the way your brain delivers a
breakthrough to you.
KEY  TAKEA WAYS
A breakthrough is a sudden advance in our knowledge or
understanding that moves us past a barrier and allows us to see and
understand something in a new way .
Eureka breakthroughs are clear , sudden, fully formed, immediately
applicable, and are most likely to arrive when you’re not thinking
about a problem. They create great excitement in the individual
experiencing one.

--- PAGE 30 ---
Metaphorical breakthroughs usually arrive as metaphors or
analogies and require interpretation before they’re complete. They
are sometimes embedded in dreams, and occur as the brain connects
two seemingly disparate items or ideas.
Intuitive breakthroughs defy logic and explanation and tend to be
more of a beginning. They allow us to make progress down a longer
path.
Paradigm breakthroughs arrive in clear , straightforward fashion,
similar to eureka breakthroughs. However , these breakthroughs
reveal a grand theory or explanation that is without any immediate
application. They bring more awe and wonder than excitement.
They are the rarest, but also the most powerful, type of
breakthrough.
No specific type of breakthrough is better or more productive than
another , it’s simply a matter of knowing which type is most natural
to you.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 31 ---
Chapter 2
                  
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 32 ---
The Chrysalis
Where Breakthroughs Come From
THE YEAR WAS 1965. The place was Clearwater , Florida. In his motel room—
the Rolling Stones weren’ t yet famous enough to af ford hotels—Keith
Richards woke up on a hot, humid morning to find his guitar and a tape
recorder on the bed beside him. Groggy and hung over , Richards rewound
the tape and pressed “play .” The hourlong tape contained fifty-nine minutes
of his own snoring. But the first thirty seconds held the opening bars and
first lyric of what became the Rolling Stones’ s most iconic hit, the song
“Satisfaction.”1 He didn’ t remember even touching the tape recorder .
Believe it or not, Richards’ s breakthrough moment follows the very
same pattern as Einstein’ s discovery of the special theory of relativity . It’s
the pattern we heard again and again when we interviewed some of the
world’ s greatest innovators for this book. And it’ s the same pattern you’ve
experienced if you’ve ever had a sudden epiphany in the shower .
Whenever you have a “shower moment,” chances are something was on
your mind, like a problem at work or an issue in a relationship. You’d
probably been mulling over the problem, trying to work it out in dif ferent
ways. Then you stepped into the shower . Your mind wandered of f as the
water poured over you. You were no longer focused. Suddenly , seemingly
out of the blue, the answer came to you.
What do your shower moments have in common with both Keith
Richards’ s and Albert Einstein’ s discoveries? When you got into the
shower , you unknowingly switched brain modes. Previously , you had been
consciously focusing on the problem. But in the shower , your mind was
probably drifting, idly daydreaming or seemingly “thinking about nothing.”
Neuroscientists have recently discovered that the secret to breakthroughs
lies in our ability to switch between these two modes, the focused and the
meandering.2

--- PAGE 33 ---
The focused mode is one you are already familiar with, because it’ s the
one you have been consciously using all your life. You can think of this
mode as the “executive mode”: it’ s the one you use to execute, to get things
done. Goal oriented and deadline focused, it’ s a champion at making lists,
following timelines, and coming in under budget. The part of your brain
responsible for this mode is called the executive network,  or EN.3
The EN is a group of brain regions near the front of your skull that help
you focus on a task and accomplish a specific goal. You’re very well versed
in the use of your EN. You did, after all, spend at least a decade in school
specifically training those brain regions. As a matter of fact, you’re using
your EN right now to read this sentence.
The EN allowed our forebears to track the patterns of the stars and the
moon, figure out the best time to plant their crops, and or ganize the
immense task of building the pyramids. It’ s also responsible for “social
inhibition,” the form of self-control we use to function in society . Without
your EN you are a three-year -old. With your EN you are (we hope) a
functional, responsible, and productive member of society .
But your EN alone can’ t create breakthroughs. It needs help from the
more meandering network, the one that creates shower moments. This is
our creative network, the default network,  or DN. You can think of the DN
as a network or council of breakthrough geniuses inside your brain. The
geniuses talk and exchange ideas, half-baked theories, and wild
speculations.
The DN is the source of all our creativity , all our invention, all our
genius—and it hasn’ t gotten nearly enough recognition. What has the DN
accomplished throughout history? A better question would be what great
discoveries hasn’ t it played a role in. If the EN gives us the ability to focus
and accomplish a task, the DN gives us the ability to look through the
complexity of the world to see the patterns underneath.4
The DN is a vital component of your brain: research has made clear that
this part of your brain is as essential to your survival as your heart or your
kidneys.5 It’s so important, in fact, that we could have written this entire
book all about the DN. We would have said, “Here it is! Here’ s how it
works, here’ s how you can access it, here’ s how you can turbochar ge it.”
But in fact, that’ s not enough. The DN, alone, can’ t create breakthroughs.

--- PAGE 34 ---
It’s the ability to use both modes, to switch from one mode to another , that enabled Keith
Richards to come up with “Satisfaction” and Albert Einstein to discover the special theory
of relativity . In fact, it’ s what enabled most discoveries in human history .
We will cover how the DN works, how you can access it, and how you
can turbochar ge it. But we will then take you to the next level and teach you
how to get both networks to work together—that is, how to switch from one
mode to the other and back again. This “mode switching” is what it’ s all
about .
As your brain takes in information via your five senses, some of it is
used in immediate circumstances, such as: step over that rock; hit the
brakes; someone just walked into the room, so stop singing.
We also use information to build patterns. Some of the patterns are
simple, such as: I like pizza from Marcello’ s, or I don’ t like it when my
mother calls because she gives me guilt for not calling. These patterns are
part of life’ s basics, its essentials. (Especially with a Jewish mother . Trust
us.)
Other patterns are more complex, such as: What is the series of notes,
chords, and bars that will become a song that will electrify American rock
and roll? Try as it might, this was not a pattern that Richards’ s EN could
figure out.
In 1965, on their first American tour , the Rolling Stones were a
midlevel group touring the country with their fourth album. They were
seriously in need of a breakthrough hit, the kind of number one song that
would make them a household name. Richards’ s EN knew this and had
been focusing on it. His executive set a direction and defined a need, but it
couldn’ t come up with a solution.
When Richards fell asleep, his executive was able to take a break from
its usual work of thinking and executing. Imagine it taking a walk from its
front of fice in the brain to the deeper , central part of the brain. There’ s a
secret lounge there, where his council of breakthrough geniuses reside. We
all have a lounge like that inside our brain.
While Richards’ s executive was working in the brain’ s front of fice, the
lights in the genius lounge were dim, because when the EN is focused on
accomplishing a specific task, it draws much of the brain’ s power . But with

--- PAGE 35 ---
the front of fice on break, the power is rerouted to the genius lounge, and
when Richards’ s executive opens the door , things are buzzing.
Imagine a lounge full of plush couches, beanbags, drinks and snacks,
whiteboards and sticky notes and dif ferent colored pens and pencils.
Leonardo da Vinci is sitting in a corner doodling on his sketch pad.
Napoleon is playing with toy soldiers. Euclid is dancing with glow sticks
that Marie Curie gave him. Michelangelo is wrapping Play-Doh around a
pencil. Teresa de Avila is trying to write in her diary , but Erasmus keeps
bothering her to ask about the fate of mankind. Steve Jobs is telling Einstein
he’s not thinking big enough. Sun Tzu is telling a story of his past victory to
no one in particular . Joan of Arc is ruminating over her betrayal by the
French. Sherlock Holmes is analyzing the environment for clues (T o what?
It doesn’ t matter . He just likes analyzing), and Amelia Earhart is taking a
nap.
When it walks into the room, Richards’ s executive asks for their
attention. “Listen folks, we need a hit. See what you can come up with.” A
direction is set, a need is defined. Then—and this is important—the
executive heads out to do something else. It knows that it has to let the
geniuses do their thing. Maybe it takes a walk, knits a sock, or takes a
shower . It can’ t be something too demanding, or it would draw brainpower
away from the lounge.
Meanwhile, back in the lounge, the lights grow bright and the geniuses
crank up the espresso machine. They are talking, writing, drawing, building
Lego models of their theories, or putting sticky notes up and moving them
around. Michelangelo and Leonardo are sketching, Sun Tzu and Napoleon
are strategizing, Teresa de Avila and Erasmus are reflecting, Joan of Arc is
worrying. (W e’re not kidding, this is really what the dif ferent parts of your
DN do.) The ideas are flying. One theory leads to another , which leads to
another .
The executive regularly checks back in so that the geniuses can show it
what they came up with. The executive might make some comments and
suggestions or clarify the direction, and then go back to its crossword
puzzle or daydream. Until one moment—during a walk, or in the shower , or
in Richards’ s case, in the middle of the night—when the geniuses get
incredibly excited, and the executive sees something spark. Something has
come together .

--- PAGE 36 ---
That night in Clearwater , Keith Richards’ s genius council showed his
executive the first eight bars of a song with a single lyric. The geniuses and
the executive looked at it together , then looked at each other and said Y es!
The executive woke Richards up, made sure he recorded it, and then went
off-task again so Richards could go back to sleep.
And that, in a nutshell, is the neuroscience of breakthroughs.
Recapping the neur oscience of “Satisfaction”:
The executive sets the direction: Write a hit song!
Richards falls asleep; his executive leaves the front of fice.
Power reroutes to the genius lounge; the brain has switched modes. *
The geniuses come up with a song that the executive recognizes as a possible
hit.
The executive rouses Richards from sleep and makes sure he records the song.
Task completed, Richards falls back asleep as his executive leaves the front
office.
The executive, among many other things, sets the direction for your
genius council to follow . And once the genius council has come up with
something, the executive is the one that puts into practice the ideas the
genius council comes up with. It’ s as if the executive were giving the genius
council a bunch of Legos and saying, “See what you can turn these into.”
The Legos snap together the same way neurons do. Your genius council is
constantly trying out new neural connections. Sometimes it makes a
multicolored Lego mess, but sometimes it puts together a locomotive, a
spaceship, or the special theory of relativity .
If the DN Is So Important, Why Haven’t You Heard of It
Befor e?
Since 1929, neuroscientists have known that the brain is in a constant state
of activity , and that background noise surrounds our more rational

--- PAGE 37 ---
processes, but only recently has that background noise been examined as
anything more than a nuisance.6
Our modern biases are geared toward the logical, the structured, the
efficient—all the things that the DN is not. As the DN’ s discoverer , Dr.
Marcus Raichle, told us, “Up until recently , our focus has been on making
the brain do specific things, ignoring the background, default,
nonconscious, nondirected activity .”7 The default network is one of the
most powerful tools at our disposal, but it is not task focused.
Focus is a positive attribute: a bias for the executive is a bias for what is
feasible. But the top performers, the stars, the innovators, the geniuses reach
breakthroughs by switching back and forth between the focused EN and the
unfocused DN.
Dr. Raichle, who discovered the existence of the default network in
1997, named it thus because it is the mode that the brain defaults  to anytime
it isn’ t on-task. And this mode never actually shuts of f, but rather quiets
down when we are focused on something. The moment we switch of f a
task, we default to this network. Look out the window , bang! Default to the
network. Get up to make cof fee, bang! We default to the network.
Dr. Raichle told us that this unconscious processing “is truly most of
what we really do; because if we didn’ t we’d be pretty hopeless.” The
network is always on, always engaged, interrupted only when we have to
perform a specific task. And this is why it uses twenty times more ener gy
than the conscious, task-focused part of the brain.8
“The brain is active all of the time,” Dr . Raichle told us, “whether you
are awake or asleep, whether you’re engaging in a particular task or you are
daydreaming. The brain is operating almost at full capacity or full strength
pretty much all of the time.”
Unfortunately we are so busy—we have so many tasks to complete to
do our jobs, hit our numbers, achieve our goals—that we leave less and less
time for our genius council to work its magic. We live in an executive
world, which makes it all the more dif ficult for us to sit still and let power
reroute to the genius lounge. But the genius council’ s participation is
essential to breakthrough thinking.
In the mid-1800s, chemists were trying to discover the structure of the
molecule benzene, a key component in gasoline. German chemist Friedrich

--- PAGE 38 ---
August Kekulé set his executive to the task. But it was one night while
dozing of f in front of a fire, having switched of f his executive mode, that
his genius council drew him a picture of a snake eating its own tail.9
Kekulé’ s genius council had given him the metaphor; his executive
interpreted the metaphor and solved the riddle: benzene was a ring. With
that, Kekulé ushered in the modern age of structural or ganic chemistry and
the rise of the pharmaceutical industry . Ever wonder why so many big
pharmaceutical companies are German: Merck, Bayer , Roche, Schering?
Kekulé set up his breakthrough lab at the University of Bonn.
Kekulé, like Einstein, Edison, Dalí, Tesla, Watts, and countless other
innovators, achieved his breakthrough thanks to the back-and-forth switch
between his executive mode and his genius mode. In fact, Dr . Raichle told
us that it was after leaving a meeting and walking down the hall that he had
the breakthrough leading to the default network’ s discovery .
So how can you access your genius mode?
Sleep on It (Y es, Really)
Adam Cheyer is the creator of Siri, Apple’ s artificial intelligence iPhone
voice assistant. Building Siri was a Herculean design and programming
task. The sheer number of variables—the ability to understand varying
speech patterns, the ability to search based on the random ways people
would request information, the ability to return answers in a useful way—
were each a massive challenge in its own right. Thankfully , Cheyer had a
secret weapon: ready access to his genius mode.
Although designing and building Siri was a highly structured task,
Cheyer knew better than to try to logically grind out every answer . Instead,
he told us, “I sleep on the issues I’m wrestling with.”10 Cheyer , like Dalí
and Edison, has discovered the incredible breakthrough power of the
hypnagogic and hypnopompic states, the half-asleep periods just before
falling asleep and just before waking. These are times when our genius
council runs on hyperdrive.
“I go to bed around eleven, noodling on a problem as I fall asleep,” he
explained. By “noodling” on the problem, Cheyer uses his EN to
deliberately and consciously focus his genius council on a question.

--- PAGE 39 ---
He relies on his genius council to make new associations and deliver
breakthroughs while asleep. In the morning he goes to his desk and uses his
EN to process the night’ s harvest of ideas.
Morning after morning while first designing Siri, he would wake up
with new insights from his DN. He’d use his EN to integrate them into the
prototype he was building. Eventually , he felt that he had something
concrete enough to show the rest of the world.
The hypnagogic and hypnopompic states are so fruitful for creativity
because our inhibiting frontal lobes—where our EN’ s front of fice is located
—are quiet, and our DN is running strong.11
Falling Asleep: Accessing Your Hypnagogic State
The hypnopompic state is the brief period of time just as you’re waking up,
while the hypnagogic state is a similarly brief period of time just as you’re
falling asleep.
Putting It into Practice: How to Enter the Hypnagogic State
Clear the room of clutter and distractions.
Have pen and paper , voice recorder , your phone on airplane mode and set to take notes,
or . . .
Dim the lights (or wear an eye mask).
Ensure you’re in a quiet place, or that only white noise is audible.
Don’ t get too comfortable—no wearing pajamas or getting in bed.
Try to find time at midday , or right after you’ve eaten, when you’re just the right
amount of tired.
Set your alarm for ten to fifteen minutes.
Take a moment to focus your brain on the problem, and then let it go. Relax and drift
off.
You’ll have better luck with the hypnagogic state if you do some prep work.
Sifting through memories of your problem, partial solutions, the contours of

--- PAGE 40 ---
your question, and the relevant information you have before you go to sleep
is important. It’ s up to you to set a direction for your brain to wander in. It
is as if there were a reception desk in your brain saying, “W elcome to
hypnagogic state. What would you like your geniuses to ponder?” You
answer the question by thinking about the problem.
Have a pad and pencil or a phone voice recorder nearby , but no other
distractions—nothing to get in the way of your recording whatever
information comes from the hypnagogic state, whether it’ s in the form of
words or an image.
Dim lighting can help, too. When you’re having an insight, your visual
cortex goes into alpha waves—that is, your brain actually ceases to process
visual information. In order to support the breakthrough ability of the
hypnagogic state, you want to enable your visual cortex to go of f line
unimpeded, and low lighting is just the thing.
We recommend blocking the light rather than turning it of f entirely
simply because you might need the light to write, and you want to do as few
things as possible between waking up and recording your ideas. You might
try wearing an eye mask; this will block the light but will be fast and easy
to remove, allowing you to begin recording your breakthrough almost
immediately .
Sound can be a matter of personal preference. Some people will want to
eliminate all sound; others may prefer white noise, a fan, nature sounds, or
the television on low volume.
Research strongly indicates that a midday nap enhances most people’ s
cognitive abilities for the rest of the day , and that we get the most benefits
from naps that last fifteen to twenty-five minutes. So if you try this exercise
and don’ t awaken with a breakthrough, you’ll at least be sharper and more
productive for the rest of the day .*
If you want to go high tech, consider Napwell, a napping mask created
by MIT  and Harvard Medical School students that uses sleep-cycle
monitoring to optimize napping. Waking up during the deep sleep portion of
your cycle makes you groggy and unproductive, but Napwell monitors your
sleep cycle to wake you up at the optimal time, and even uses light to
mimic a natural sunrise.
Don’ t get frustrated if you find you’re not actually falling asleep: first,
it might take some practice; and second, breakthroughs often come while

--- PAGE 41 ---
relaxed and mind-wandering but not asleep.
Waking Up: Accessing the Hypnopompic State
Deep sleep is not only allowed but required to access the hypnopompic
state, so fluf f those pillows and climb under the blanket. This is the state
between rising out of sleep and coming into consciousness.
Presumably , hours will have passed since you fell asleep the night
before, so it’ s imperative that you sent your brain in the right direction.
Putting It into Practice: How to Access the Hypnopompic State
Watch a documentary on something you know nothing about. Thinking about new
narratives will trip new neural circuits and help your brain form new associations.
Look through old photos. Your DN might find something valuable in a memory file that
you’d for gotten years ago.
Read a book from your adolescence. Old thoughts and feelings will come rushing in.
Take a walk outside. You’ll simultaneously oxygenate your brain, flip the script on your
bedtime routine, and see and feel things more interesting than your bathroom.
Choose a progressive alarm that starts out quietly and builds in volume. You don’ t want
to be jolted awake, bypassing the liminal state you were trying to take advantage of.
Nature sounds work well here.
Have a recording device nearby , whether to write, type, or record your voice. The
breakthroughs emer ging from the hypnopompic state can be fleeting and ephemeral, so
if you don’ t record them, they’ll retreat from you as you wake up.
It’s hard to ignore the number of creative geniuses who credit their
successes to the hypnopompic state. “Half the time I get answers in the
middle of the night,”12 said Jef f Hawkins, who started the entire smartphone
revolution when he created the Palm and Treo and is now working on Grok,
an artificial-intelligence system based on how our brain’ s neurons actually
work. “I think about it while falling asleep, and in the middle of the night
I’ll wake up and I’ll lie in bed silently in the dark and just think. It’ s very
important that it is dark. And then the answer will just come to me.”

--- PAGE 42 ---
Sleep is a great tool for accessing your genius mode. Judah has often
awoken with great new ideas. He will often finish a conversation with a
client by saying, “Alright, I’ll have an answer in the morning.” His clients
often find an answer in their e-mail in-box over breakfast. Olivia, on the
other hand, has never woken up with a new insight. When she naps, she
rises groggy , hungry , and slightly grumpy . If she fell asleep with marbles in
her hand, when they inevitably dropped, bounced, and rolled on the ground,
she’d probably startle awake thinking “What idiot is making such a bloody
noise?” So don’ t beat yourself up if the hypnagogic and hypnopompic states
don’t do much for you.
We made great use of this technique when we worked with a successful start-up’ s secret
skunkworks design studio. One day the small team faced a particularly vexing design
challenge. As the ener gy wound down, Judah opened a few beers to signal a shift. Once
everyone had relaxed a little, Olivia tried to casually frame the problem.
“So it seems like you all are trying to figure out how to use superlow bandwidth to
create connectivity without cell towers. Does that sound about right?” It did not sound right
and the group made sure to be very clear about what the issue was. And that was precisely
what we needed them to do: at the very end of the day , they clearly defined the problem
they were working on.
That night we sent texts to a few of the team members just before bed to help their ENs
focus their DNs before sleep. We framed the problem just as they had earlier . This is more
than telling someone to sleep on it. The creation of the clear and concise framing along
with focus before sleep is key . We acted as the executives to set the direction for the team’ s
genius lounges. The next morning, one of the engineers showed up with eyes shining. The
solution had come to her as she woke up.
KEY  TAKEA WAYS
Our brains have two modes of operation: focused mode and
meandering mode.
Focused mode is the executive mode that helps us get things done
and is powered by the executive network (EN) of the brain. The EN
is goal and action oriented.
Meandering mode is the source of creativity and invention, and is
powered by the default network (DN) of the brain. The DN is
always running in the background, 24/7.

--- PAGE 43 ---
Both modes are required for breakthroughs, and therefore we must
learn to switch back and forth between them.
The minutes just before and after sleep can be a fertile environment
for breakthroughs. Falling asleep allows us to access DN solutions
in the hypnagogic state. Waking from sleep allows us to discover
DN solutions through the hypnopompic state.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 44 ---
Chapter 3
                  
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 45 ---
On the Hunt
How to Access Genius Mode
IMAGINE A PARTY inside your brain where all your ideas, memories,
predictions, feelings, and environmental cues are meeting each other ,
making small talk, inviting new ideas into the conversation, excusing
themselves to go to the bar for another drink, bumping into a new idea on
the way to the bathroom, excitedly talking and dancing with each other .
That, essentially , is what happens inside your genius lounge.
In this chapter , we’ll give you tools to make ideas collide with each
other and spark breakthroughs.
Unfortunately , as anyone who zones out all the time can testify , simply
taking a break will not lead to inspiration: to stoke creativity , you need to
perform tasks that allow your mind to wander .1
After an “unusual uses” creativity test (“How many things can you do
with a hanger?”) students were given a twelve-minute break. One group
simply rested; one did an easy , mindless task; one did a demanding memory
game; and one group took no break.
When the participants reconvened and retook the creativity test, the
“mindless task” group performed an average of 41 percent better . By
contrast, participants in the other three groups showed no improvement.
Interestingly , this was only the case for problems that were already
being mentally chewed on; doing a mindless task didn’ t seem to lead to a
general increase in creative problem-solving ability . This makes sense: our
executive has to have set a clear goal for our geniuses in order for them to
be productive.
Wher e Butterflies Live
Let’s say that you’re hard at work finishing a report. You feel there’ s
something missing but you don’ t know what it is. You can’ t quite make the

--- PAGE 46 ---
connection. You could stare blankly at the wall, try to catch up on e-mail, or
call a friend who’ s been guilt-tripping you about returning their voice mail.
Or you could allow your executive to wander by performing an
undemanding task: water your plants, walk around the building, or make a
sandwich. All three have the possibility of helping you get to breakthrough.
When your executive is “distracted” with low-pressure activities, your
genius lounge can draw more brainpower .2
Science researchers in the field of creativity now recommend the
regular inclusion of “mindless” work (i.e., work that is low in both
cognitive dif ficulty and performance pressures) into the standard workday
model as a critical component of high-creativity output. Their research
suggests that to enhance creativity among chronically overworked
professionals, their schedules should alternate between bouts of cognitively
challenging, high-pressure work and bouts of mindless work.3
Putting It into Practice: Mindless Activities We Recommend
Doing puzzles or walking labyrinths
Watching a movie you’ve already seen countless times
Throwing a rubber ball against the wall
Watching sunlight through the trees
Staring out the window
Running
Washing dishes by hand
Playing video games
Folding laundry
Cleaning a cluttered space
Drawing, doodling, or using an adult coloring book
Cooking a meal you’ve cooked many times before
You could also listen to music. If you play an instrument, then by all
means go for it, but give your mind a chance to meander by choosing a

--- PAGE 47 ---
song you know incredibly well. The music will open your brain into an
associative state, while your familiarity with the song will allow you to
focus less on the task at hand.4
For those of us who are not musicians, just listening to music turns on a
host of brain circuits, and listening with headphones helps to block out the
outside world. You can sit on your couch, lie down on the floor , or go out
for a run. Any music will work as long as it is without lyrics. Sorry , pop-
song-loving runners: even if you know the lyrics backwards, they will still
grab hold of the verbal part of your brain and activate the EN.
If at any point you feel blocked, stymied, frustrated at your lack of
progress, walk away from your desk and start any of the above activities.
Each of them will get your executive out of the front of fice and reroute the
power to your genius lounge. The espresso is on and the associating begins.
Try this: Walk to a newsstand or open your computer . Pick a magazine
or Web site you’d never usually read. If you usually get Golf Digest,  get a
knitting or architecture magazine. If you’re into fashion, buy Forbes.  Take
in information unrelated to the challenge in front of you.5 You’ll be amazed
at how quickly an unexpected train of thought can appear and start to
snowball.
Olivia sometimes finds herself absentmindedly staring at her
vacuuming robot while it cleans the house. Her conscious mind is idly
wondering where the robot will go next and trying to predict the patterns.
But in the back of her mind, she can often feel her genius council churning
away . Although this completely negates the intended time-saving aspect of
the device, it’ s very beneficial for breakthroughs.
It’s not always easy to switch out of our focused, executive mode.
Serena was a social entrepreneur with a company dedicated to eradicating the lung
diseases caused by dusty and muddy floors in Africa. She was driven by her sense of
purpose and yet kept asking herself whether it was okay to spend all her time building her
company . Shouldn’ t she be making more time to meet a nice man and start a family? It
seemed everyone put this question to her , from her mother to her coworkers to her
investors. The question acted as a weight and drain on her cognitive load.
Judah knew the answer to this question lay deeper inside her than she was comfortable
going. He needed to help her access her genius council. But someone as driven as Serena,
especially when driven by purpose, would not set her executive to the side easily . He

--- PAGE 48 ---
needed to provide her executive with an easy goal to occupy it so that the power would
reroute to her genius lounge.
At the retreat where we met her , there was a labyrinth made from stones. A labyrinth is
not a maze. Rather , a labyrinth lays out a single path to follow . Once you enter it, there are
no choices for you to make. All you have to do is follow the contours of the path as it winds
its way inexorably toward the center . The path gives your executive just enough to focus
on, while the lack of choices leaves plenty of excess power to reroute to the genius lounge.
Judah set Serena at the start of the labyrinth. He then gave her executive a little help by
focusing it on the question: “Are you unhappy devoting your life to your work? Do you feel
something is missing?” He then ushered her into the labyrinth with a single command:
“Walk slowly .” By the time Serena reached the center her shoulders had relaxed and her
brow had unfurrowed. “I’m happy devoting my life to my work,” she said. “It’ s everyone
else who has an issue.”
Afterward, Judah asked Serena what had happened. She said she wasn’ t quite sure. She
was walking the path of the labyrinth looking at the stones and the leaves on the ground.
She was wondering at what degree the path curved. Then she said she felt like she just
“spaced out. Like I was just walking. And then I knew . I knew .” Serena had a eureka
breakthrough.
Serena was able to return to building her company with all her ener gy and dedication
and no more doubts nipping at her heels. They were other people’ s doubts, not hers. She
wanted to have an impact on the world through her work.
One of the most interesting ways to let your mind wander is to watch
something that is happening in real time. One attraction at the Museum of
Modern Art that had people spellbound was a real-time representation of
communication patterns between New York and the rest of the world,
created by MIT . You can see it at senseable.mit.edu/nyte/visuals.html.
Picture it in your mind right now: you’re looking at a dark globe, with jets
of light emanating from New York to the rest of the world as the city’ s
inhabitants make phone calls. You’re seeing exactly what is happening, in
the moment, right now . Fascinating, right?
Now , imagine this exact same representation with a year ’s delay . What
you’re seeing on the globe is what happened twelve months ago. You will
most likely feel your level of interest drop considerably . There is a
fascination with the immediate that catches the EN, while letting the DN
wander .
“So what’ s the single best mindless activity I can do?” our clients often
ask us. For once, we have a straightforward answer: if we had to choose one
single mindless activity for you to do, it would be walking.

--- PAGE 49 ---
Take a Walk
In a recent study , participants walking indoors on a treadmill facing a blank
wall or walking outdoors in the fresh air produced twice as many creative
responses compared to those who were sitting down.6
“I thought walking outside would blow everything out of the water ,”
said the lead researcher , “but walking on a treadmill in a small, boring room
still had strong results.” The study also found that creative juices continued
to flow even when a person sat back down shortly after a walk. “W e know
walking meetings promote creativity , but walking before a meeting may be
nearly as useful.”7
From a cognitive angle, walking demands just the right amount of focus
from our executive, without asking too much. Walking is a very complex
task: we are taking in constant input from our feet, legs, hips, arms, and, of
course, our inner ears, the heart of our balance gyroscope. But our brains
are experts at this task. Through long familiarity , the executive can do all
this with very little ener gy.8
From a physical angle, walking stimulates your brain. Increased blood
flow causes a cascade of wonderful changes in the brain, including the
release of brain-derived neurotropic factor (BDNF) and other growth
factors. BDNF promotes the birth of new neurons and the formation of new
synapses, and it also strengthens existing synapses.9
Open of fices have strong detractors as well as proponents, but with
their few inner walls and rolling tables, they’re at least walker friendly . In
fact, according to research out of Stanford, the most important thing these
open spaces of fer to creativity is the ability to walk. Doing so increased a
person’ s creative output by 60 percent, the study found.10
Darwin famously had a quarter -mile-long walking path called the
Sandwalk that was his place to go and think when working on a problem.
“So important was walking to his thought processes that Darwin sometimes
described a problem he was working on in terms of the number of turns
around his path he would need to solve it.”11
Mason Currey , after studying the habits of nearly two hundred of the
world’ s most prolific inventors and innovators over the ages, found that the
single common habit of these great inventors and innovators was walking.

--- PAGE 50 ---
As Currey reports, Charles Dickens famously took three-hour walks every
afternoon—and what he observed on them fed directly into his writing.
Tchaikovsky made do with a two-hour walk, but wouldn’ t return a
minute early , convinced that cheating himself of the full 120 minutes would
make him ill. Beethoven took lengthy strolls after lunch, carrying a pencil
and paper with him in case inspiration struck.
Søren Kierkegaard is quoted as saying “I have walked myself into my
best thoughts.” He is also reported to have often rushed back to his desk and
resumed writing, still wearing his hat and carrying his walking stick or
umbrella.12
Immanuel Kant would take a walk around the town square every day at
the same time.
Werner Heisenber g wrote about long, exhausting conversations every
night with Niels Bohr as they tried to wrestle with the strange realities of
quantum mechanics that “ended almost in despair .”13
At the end of each of these nights Heisenber g went for a walk alone in
the neighboring park all the time asking himself the same question: Could
nature really be as absurd as it seemed in his experiments? When
Heisenber g came up with his uncertainty principle, now the second most
famous and influential scientific theory of the twentieth century , he was
walking through the park on his way home.14 Textbook mind-wandering.
Walking, when used for mind-wandering, works well in quiet, peaceful
places; less well when you have to be aware of cars, traf fic lights, joggers,
and so forth, because your executive mode has to stay active. Whether to
meander or to walk with purpose is up to you: Judah is comfortable walking
aimlessly , but Olivia needs a route and a destination.
Here’ s the thing: you don’ t just take a walk and magically have a
breakthrough. Walking is a wonderful way to set the conditions, but there is
more to it than simply meandering along.
Putting It into Practice: Creative Walking
Define your problem. The act of verbalizing what you’re looking for can get you
started on finding the answer .

--- PAGE 51 ---
Review your raw material. Read over the latest information you’ve collected. Check all
the random Post-its and slips of paper you’ve jotted notes on, or any digital equivalent.
Set a goal. Are you going to walk till you break through the blockage, or just for a set
period of time or to a destination?
Pay attention. It’ s fine to space out a bit, but don’ t neglect the scenery entirely .
Carry a notebook. Always have a way to record your thoughts on hand.
Keep something in your hand. A coin, a stone, a paper clip, a Star Wars figurine—we
won’ t judge. Our hands send massive amounts of information to our brains, and
keeping those channels open keeps our brains in a more associative state. Adam Cheyer
always keeps a Rubik’ s Cube on his desk to play with while thinking.
Stop and write it down. Don’ t enjoy the moment of insight so much that you keep
playing with it in your head. Few things are as frustrating as for getting a brilliant
thought.
Experiment with Your Envir onment
The stereotypical image of the mad genius with a messy desk exists for a
reason: creative mode is messy . Mess is good for creativity—in fact, it
might sometimes be necessary , or as one of our favorite collaborators put it,
“Messy is nessy .”
Wouldn’ t you find it more enjoyable to rummage through a chaotic pile
of Legos than to be presented with a box of neatly or ganized pieces? Most
of us instinctively want to dump all the Legos into a pile and jumble them
together . Minimalism is great for productivity but not for creativity .
One inventor was known to have two very dif ferent working rooms;
one was Spartan, with almost no stimuli, the other a Wonka-esque
madhouse to stimulate creativity . Many tech companies have playrooms for
their employees, with grown-up toys like woodworking equipment. What
you’re aiming for is a contained mess, to stimulate creativity but not hinder
productivity .
One very creative young innovator told us he regularly goes through
cycles of rearranging everything in his apartment, creating a new
environment—disturbing, then reordering, and after a little while doing it
all over again. (It drives his roommates insane.)

--- PAGE 52 ---
Putting It into Practice: Change Your Environment
Put up prisms, which combine the advantages of light, color , and motion.
Bring nature indoors by filling your creative space with natural elements such as plants,
rocks, a small fountain, light, and so on.
Climb a tree. Yes, we’re serious. You probably haven’ t done it in some time, and that’ s
exactly why you should do it. Seeing the world from a weird angle is surprisingly
helpful in unlocking a new perspective.
If you live in a city , go to the top of a tall building and look out. If your building has
windows in public spaces, go up and look out from there. Borrow a colleague’ s office
that looks out a dif ferent side of the building than yours. Stare out the window with the
new view and notice the dif ferences. How are the streets laid out? What are the trees
like? Where are the bodies of water? How would you have designed the city
differently?
With all these suggestions, as always, your mileage may vary . Your aim
is to find the balance of stimuli that works for you. Olivia likes to reflect on
train journeys. The continuously unfolding scenery provides her with
something to gaze at while her mind wanders, or fresh stimuli in case her
mind gets stuck, but not so much that it is distracting. In addition, being a
passenger is a receptive rather than active state, with no immediate action to
take and no responsibilities, unlike driving, for example, so it’ s easier to let
your mind wander .
Some people get their best ideas when on planes, others in the shower ,
others while gardening, running, or sitting still. Some may want to draw ,
others watch a movie, read something random, or cook. Some people will
look out on a vista or the ocean, others may go to a forest. Some will want
to walk the beach, others will want to sit with their back against a tree.
The really important thing is to figure out where you tend to get your
breakthroughs, and to put yourself in those environments more often.
We often assume that sitting still or performing a repetitive motion like running is the key .
But not always. Katashi, a senior vice president at a marketing firm, was trying to figure
out what to do with a dif ficult campaign in Japan. Katashi was a bundle of ener gy. He
talked fast and walked faster . His ener gy kept his team in a state of agitation.

--- PAGE 53 ---
We knew that telling Katashi to stare out the window or sit under a tree was not going to
work. We also knew that he had grown up playing baseball. He had even thought about
playing professionally in Japan.
One day we took the whole team to Central Park. Olivia gathered the other members of
the team and led them on a wander through the part of the park called the Ramble. She
motioned toward trees or benches where people could sit and go quiet. Judah stayed with
Katashi and pulled out a reaction ball. It’ s a hard rubber ball with eight round protrusions
and it’ s used as a training device in baseball. When you throw the reaction ball on the
ground it takes crazy bounces, mimicking a baseball taking a bad hop.
Judah stood fifty feet away from Katashi and began to throw the reaction ball at him.
Katashi assumed the crouched stance of an infielder . A big smile spread across his face. As
the ball hit the ground and veered all over the place, Katashi chased after it, sometimes
making spectacular grabs, sometimes getting hit in the shin, sometimes missing it
altogether .
Nothing about this activity suggested his genius lounge was getting the ener gy it
needed. But Katashi was so ener getic that the activity worked. At one point he stopped and
let the ball go right by him. He looked up and said, “That’ s it.”
There are no right ways to do this. You have to find your way .
Putting It into Practice: Play with Your Physical Surroundings
Right now , find five colors you enjoy around you.
Touch textures till you find five you find enjoyable.
Find five dif ferent hand movements. Go ahead, we’ll wait. Just do dif ferent things with
your hands.
Your environment, of course, isn’ t just what you see; it’ s also what you
hear. Here are two exercises to experiment with your auditory environment.
Visualize the music:  As you listen to a piece of classical music,
imagine a story to go along with it. Is a young hero leaving his small village
and encountering pirates and maidens and sea monsters? Is the piece
describing the emotional breakdown of an old man after the loss of his
wife? (The Disney movie Fantasia  was written this way .)
Change the soundtrack:  This one is Judah’ s favorite, and it’ s based on
an old film trick by Ser gei Eisenstein, a master of Russian film. Play a song
while watching a movie scene on mute. Nine times out of ten, Judah says,
the music will match the scene so well it’ s spooky . During an of f-site

--- PAGE 54 ---
meeting for the drug company Genentech, one executive suggested pairing
the final scene from the movie Casablanca  with “W e Are the Champions”
by Queen. The experience sparked a conversation about pairing researchers
with artists and musicians to help them visualize the chemical structures of
key molecules to improve drug delivery .
Putting It into Practice: The Best Background Noises for Creative Work
An app called Cof fitivity recreates the ambient noise of a cof fee shop. (The creators
originally set out to test the ef fect of background noise on productivity levels.)
If you’re stuck doing repetitive work, binaural-beat tracks—which play slightly
different frequencies into your right and left ear—can help you through the laborious
implementation necessary to turn an insight into reality .
Try electronic music, which features gradually building “narratives” of repeated base
melodies.
The chug-chugging of a train and the churning of a washing machine are incredibly
soothing. You can find countless clips online.
For a choice of ambient sounds try the Web site ASoftMurmur .com. It gives you
choices that you can mix and match, like rain and thunder , or waves and wind, or waves
and rain.
When you want a fresh insight on a problem, you can also change your
social environment. You could run the idea by dif ferent nationalities, age
groups, or social classes. This is why travel is such a powerful provider of
epiphanies: you are surrounded with all new stimuli. Traveling provides a
completely dif ferent environment in many ways: physical, auditory , social,
and so forth.
Interaction exponentially increases your associative power . Just like
you, other people’ s brains bounce between dif ferent memories and facts,
relating random facts to new endeavors. By sharing your associative ideas
with other people, they have a chance of making an association you never
would have thought of.
On the other hand, breakthroughs come most often when you’re alone:
it’s hard to dedicate the majority of your brainpower to your internal genius
council when other people are around. As with everything else, the best

--- PAGE 55 ---
ratio of solo to social time is dif ferent for each person. You need to find
what works for you.
Albert Einstein considered long walks on the beach to be imperative
“so that I can listen to what is going on inside my head.”15 The need for
solitude seems to be understood by many of the “greats.” Mozart said that it
was only when he was entirely alone, whether “traveling in a carriage or
walking after a good meal or during the night when I cannot sleep” that his
best ideas flowed most abundantly .16
Nikola Tesla, inventor of the alternating current that powers our lives,
asserted that: “The mind is sharper and keener in seclusion and
uninterrupted solitude. . . . Be alone—that is the secret of invention: be
alone, that is when ideas are born.”17
For the greatest possible change of environment, consider
experimenting with your psychological environment: become someone or
even something else.
A few cutting-edge techniques such as “bodily resonance” can actually
simulate this experience. In a fascinating study , researchers used the “rubber
hand illusion” to create a greater sense of kinship in people.18 Light-skinned
Caucasian participants were given multisensory stimulation to experience a
dark-skinned hand as belonging to them. The more the participants came to
experience the dark-skinned hand as their own, the more positive their
attitude toward people of another race became. By expanding what people
could see and feel as part of their own body , the researchers were able to
change their mindset.
The rubber hand illusion can go quite far: you can even “become” an
object. People were able to “become” a spoon and feel real empathy for it,
even reflexively wincing when it was hit with a hammer!
Putting It into Practice: Change Your Psychological Environment
Watch a documentary about a topic you’d consider “random.” Try to find connections
to what you are currently working on. How is this new world of bourbon distillers in
rural Kentucky in any way similar to your project on marketing lip balm?
Spend the day dressed like someone else. If you’re usually a casual dresser , wear a suit.
If you wear a suit every day , try wearing a sleeveless shirt and shorts. How do you feel

--- PAGE 56 ---
different, knowing that you’re being perceived dif ferently? (Our clothes are an element
of our psychological environment. Several studies have shown that participants’
confidence and concentration levels were boosted by wearing a doctor ’s white lab
coat.)19
For the next twenty minutes, give in to your first impulse. Just do whatever you feel
like doing. Harder than you thought, right? We are constantly stopping ourselves from
doing all kinds of things.
Constraints Will Set You Fr ee
Creative constraints are what allow you to change your creative
environment. Perhaps the most famous (and, unfortunately , probably
apocryphal) story of creative constraints was a bet writer Ernest
Hemingway made with friends that he could write an entire story in just six
words.
How could one possibly introduce characters, explain their
relationships, awaken the reader ’s emotions, and tell a story in just six
words? Hemingway did so in one sentence:
For sale: baby shoes, never worn.
When Steve Jobs told the designer of the very first Apple mouse that it
had to fit in his hand, work on any surface including his jeans, and cost less
than fifteen dollars, he was setting creative constraints.20
You can also use time constraints, as in setting a deadline. Some people
can be creative on deadline, and many have to be. For many people, work
expands to fill the time available, so deadlines help bring focus. “In the
software industry ,” explains engineer Kevin Sauer , part of Microsoft’ s
Black Belt team, “we use what we call iterations or sprints to focus what we
are working on at any given time. I personally have experienced how when
making these iterations very short (like a week), our teams were
hyperfocused and accomplished more than some of the traditional two-
week or even one-month sprints. A week is an absurdly short timeline, so
the absurdity lowers the stakes. A hundred percent perfection is not on the
table, so we are free from fear of failure.”21

--- PAGE 57 ---
How can you experiment with constraints? You can constrain the time
you have to do something, the space you have to do it in, or the resources
you have: materials or money .
Our dear friend and creativity expert Tina Seelig, a founding faculty
member of Stanford’ s famous Institute of Design, known as the D-school,
was teaching a one-week class to help students understand the general
principles of entrepreneurial thinking.
She handed each student an envelope with what they only knew as their
“initial funding.“ She told them they had four or five days to plan, but once
they opened the envelope, they had two hours to make as much money as
they could.
When they opened the envelopes, they saw they each had five dollars.
As Seelig explains it, the teams that made the most money didn’ t bother
using the five dollars. They realized that five dollars framed the problem
way too tightly .
One team set up a stand in front of the student union. They of fered to
measure bicycle tire pressure for free and fill tires for a dollar . About an
hour in they realized people were super appreciative and so they pivoted
and stopped char ging a dollar and instead accepted donations. People
donated even more. They walked away with a few hundred dollars. Another
team made reservations at many of the popular restaurants in Palo Alto and
sold their reservations as the times came up.
But the team that made the most money sold the three-minute
presentation time they had in class to a company that wanted to recruit
Stanford students. They realized that three minutes was the most valuable
thing they had. The lesson here is that we often perceive constraints where
there are none.
When filming Apocalypse Now , the director Francis Ford Coppola
expected his star , Marlon Brando, to show up on set emaciated in order to
play the character of Colonel Kurtz. Instead, Brando showed up overweight.
So Coppola filmed Brando constantly in shadow . The audience could
almost never get a clear look at him. Although this was done to hide the fact
that he was too heavy , its ef fect was to make Kurtz even more menacing.
The decision was praised as one of the director ’s best in the movie.22

--- PAGE 58 ---
Seelig uses the example from Monty Python and the Holy Grail,  where
the knights do not ride horses because the production could not af ford
horses. Instead, the knights pretend-gallop through the forest while their
servants follow making the sound of horses’  hooves with two coconut
shells. It was one of the funnier and most memorable parts of the movie.
The experimentation with various kinds of constraints is also part of
what is known as design thinking, an iterative method taught at Stanford’ s
D-school for the practical resolution of problems and the creation of better
future situations. Since we could need an entire book to do design thinking
justice, you’ll find several excellent ones listed in the resources section of
this book.
KEY  TAKEA WAYS
To achieve true breakthroughs, we must allow our minds to wander .
Research shows that alternating between cognitively challenging
work and activities with a low cognitive load enhances creativity .
Walking is one of the best activities to enhance creativity . Mason
Currey found it was the single common factor among nearly two
hundred of the world’ s most prolific inventors and innovators. Be
disciplined in your process and always have a way to capture your
thoughts along the way .
Although walking outside may be ideal, don’ t let the absence of the
perfect setting hinder you. Walking around the of fice or even on a
treadmill provides tremendous creative advantages.
A change of environment sparks creativity . This change can be to
your physical environment, or to your auditory , social, or
psychological environments.
Setting constraints can be helpful, whether they are financial
constraints, time constraints, or creative constraints. Likewise,
removing constraints can also produce unexpected breakthroughs.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 59 ---
Chapter 4
                  
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 60 ---
The Butterfly Process
How Breakthroughs Happen Inside Your Head
“CREA TIVITY  IS JUST  connecting things. When you ask creative people how
they did something, they feel a little guilty because they didn’ t really do it,
they just saw something. . . . That’ s because they were able to connect
experiences they’ve had and synthesize new things.”1
What Steve Jobs is describing is called “associative thinking,” and is
essential for breakthrough thinking. Too often, we make the mistake of
assuming breakthroughs are freestanding ideas, something never thought of
before by anyone in any context. The truth is that almost every
breakthrough is a combination of ideas that already existed.
Henry Ford’ s breakthrough of the assembly line came when he made an
association between the Chicago meatpacking industry’ s use of mechanized
hooks and bakeries’  use of industrial conveyer belts.2 He put the two
together , applied them to the building of the automobile, and the assembly
line was born.
A breakthrough in gun accuracy came when gunmakers looked to the
bow and arrow . The feathers on the back of arrows cause the arrow to spin,
and the spin makes the arrow fly straight. In the same way , a football flies
straight when thrown in a spiral. To make their bullets spin, gunmakers
carved spirals inside their gun barrels. Accuracy increased fivefold. Because
putting feathers on arrows was called rifling, these guns became known as
rifles.3
René Laennec was a French doctor who one day observed two young
children communicating through a long, hollow piece of wood. One
scratched the end of the stick with a pin and the other put her ear to the far
end of the stick to hear it. The wood amplified the sound. Laennec went
home and invented the stethoscope.4
For T. J. Parker , what he did when he was bored helped him start a
revolution in the medication industry with his company , PillPack.

--- PAGE 61 ---
In 2006, the Walter Reed Army Medical Center released a study
showing that educating patients, and much more importantly , placing their
medications in single-serving blister packs, increased proper use of
prescription drugs from 61 percent to 96 percent. But the study noted that
blister packing was too time consuming to scale.5
This matters because a study of patients with cardiovascular conditions
showed that nearly half of all hospital admissions were caused by
medications being taken improperly .6 These mistakes cost Americans
millions of dollars—by some accounts, billions—every year . If someone
could figure out how to scale blister packing medications, millions of
people would be healthier and millions of dollars would be saved.
Enter Parker .
With his cofounder Elliot Cohen, he founded PillPack in 2013.7
PillPack sends people their daily doses of multiple medications in single-
serving packs with the date and time of day it is to be taken on the label.
How did Parker come up with this?
First and foremost, Parker was steeped in the pharmaceutical world.
The reason he heard of the Walter Reed study is that his father , a
pharmacist, had started a business prepackaging meds for patients in
nursing homes.
Parker had then gone to pharmacy school, but also taken classes in
industrial design, furniture design, architecture, textiles, and clothing
design. He told us, “I studied design because I was bored. The things you
do to waste time because you’re bored are the things you care about and
will get good at.” He also volunteered to help run MIT’ s entrepreneurship
competition and dabbled in tech.
Using his knowledge of pharmacology , operations, technology , and
design, Parker created a system that uses robots to sort pills into customized
packets. Perhaps some credit for the PillPack idea goes to Parker ’s
pharmacy degree, but a lot of other people with the same degree failed to
come up with such an innovative solution to an industry problem.
One of Thomas Edison’ s least successful inventions was the electric
pen, patented in 1876, to help make copies. People just weren’ t that into it.
In 1891, a man named Samuel O’Reilly saw the pen and had a
breakthrough. What did O’Reilly figure out?8

--- PAGE 62 ---
Here’ s one way to approach the question. What job could O’Reilly have
had that the electric pen would be useful in, but in a dif ferent way than
Edison intended? When he saw an electric pen place ink on paper , what else
could he imagine putting ink on?
Here’ s another way to approach it. What is the essence of a pen? We
think of a pen as something we write with, a way to communicate language
on paper . But that is a pen’ s most common use. Its essence is that it makes
ink marks on surfaces. Do those marks have to be made on paper? Do those
marks have to be language? Of course not. What other kinds of marks could
an electric pen make? And on what other kinds of surfaces?
Sit with that question. See what comes to you. Or start making a list of
kinds of marks and surfaces. Even if you guess wrong the guessing itself is
great practice.
Here’ s another hint. Instead of looking at the electric pen, look at
Samuel O’Reilly . He worked in downtown New York in the late 1800s. It
was a rough-and-tumble place with many unsavory characters, taverns, and
oysters sold from carts on the street. The Brooklyn Navy Yard across the
river meant there were plenty of sailors walking the streets. Does that help?
Samuel O’Reilly was a tattoo artist. After seeing Edison’ s electric pen
he invented the modern tattooing machine. Instead of ink writing language
on paper , he applied ink to skin to create images.
Over a hundred years later , design student Pierre Emm had a similar
associative breakthrough. The French Ministry of Culture had challenged
students to create remixes of images in the public domain. While riding his
bike one day , Emm thought to hack a 3-D printer so it would draw tattoos
on skin.9
In the 1970s, Southern California suf fered a drought that caused people
to empty their swimming pools. Skateboarders didn’ t fixate on the concrete
holes in the ground as empty pools. Instead they saw them as proto-skate
parks, the kind you see in nearly every city today . In 1963, another
skateboarder , Tom Sims, wanted to combine his two favorite sports, skiing
and skateboarding. He also wanted to keep practicing skateboarding during
the winter months. In his seventh-grade wood shop class he built a
“skiboard.” Skateboarding on snow became snowboarding.10

--- PAGE 63 ---
Seven Essential Innovation Questions
Here’ s a tool to help you create associations. It’ s called the seven essential
innovation questions, or SEIQ. This tool does an amazing job of occupying
your executive with a goal. Our executives love having a goal. When
occupied with a goal, our ENs are happy to let our DN geniuses go at full
speed.
SEIQ was created at Autodesk, one of the world leaders in 3-D design
software, from entertainment to architecture and industrial design. When
you walk through the halls of Autodesk, you will encounter some of their 3-
D–printed creations, including a dress, jewelry , coral reefs, a fully
functional motorcycle, and a full-size jet engine. Autodesk understands
creativity .
Their innovation strategist, Bill O’Connor , leads teams through the
seven essential innovation questions, which are actually a guide to thinking
creatively . The questions point you in fruitful directions. They are helpful
even for “creative types” because they help you hit all the dif ferent angles.
As always, these questions cannot guarantee an association or
breakthrough or a specific outcome. But they are a very helpful framework
to set the optimal conditions for breakthroughs to happen. Moving through
these questions creates the right space for butterflies to emer ge.
O’Connor says that we have all imagined, looked at, moved, used,
connected, changed, and made things in our lives—but we haven’ t done so
systematically or consistently . The seven essential questions are about the
power of the checklist. “This isn’ t brainstorming,” he told us, “this is
brainstreaming.”
You take whatever it is you are trying to break through and place it in
the room, so to speak, and then ask the seven questions about it—that is,
look at it from seven dif ferent angles. Not all of them work for everything.
All you need is one of them to work for the breakthrough to happen.
The key words of the seven questions are Look, Use, Move,
Interconnect, Alter , Make, Imagine. The acronym is LUMIAMI.
1. Look: What aspects of the problem could we look at in a new
way, or from a new perspective?

--- PAGE 64 ---
2. Use: What facets of the problem could we use in a new way , or
for the first time?
3. Move: What parts of the problem could we move, changing its
position in time or space?
4. Interconnect: What could we connect that’ s not yet connected,
or what could we connect in a dif ferent way , if it already is
connected?
5. Alter: What could we change or alter , in terms of design and
performance?
6. Make: What could we make that is truly new?
7. Imagine: What could we imagine that would create a great
experience?
Each of the seven essential questions has its own checklist. They’re
mainly geared toward physical, tangible breakthroughs, so we’ve starred (*)
the ones that also work for intangible products and innovations. You’ll
notice that almost every question forces you to confront your functional
fixedness about an object or concept.
1. Look
Higher: Look at something from a 30,000-foot view .
Reverse: Look at something in reverse, from the back, from the other
side.
*Value: Look at something from the point of view of its value.
*Kids: Look at something the way a kid might look at it.
Ignore: Look at something and ignore what you know to be true about
it.
Holistic: Look at something from the point of view of the whole thing,
from a systems point of view .

--- PAGE 65 ---
When Einstein looked at the universe and said that no matter how fast
you are going, light will always move at 186,000 miles per second to you,
he ignored what he knew to be true.
2. Use
*Leverage: How could you use this to leverage something else?
*Foundation: How could you use this to build the foundation for
something?
*Substitute: How could you use this in place of something else?
*Aspect: How could you use an aspect of this in a new way?
*Change: How could you use this to change something you’re doing?
*Apply: How could you apply this in a new way?
When Samuel O’Reilly turned Edison’ s electric pen into a tattoo
machine, he saw how to substitute it for what he was using. And when the
Southern Pacific Railroad built a series of microwave towers to facilitate an
intercontinental network of telecommunications, they were just focused on
improving their trains’  efficiency . But this also became the foundation for
the telecom company Sprint ( Southern Pacific Railroad Internal Network
Telecommunications).
3. Move
*Import: What new component could you bring in to make a change?
*Rearrange: What could you rearrange to make a change?
*Replace: What could you swap out and replace to make a change?
*Remove: What could you remove to make a change?
*Speed: What could you make go faster or slower to make a change?
*Frequency: What could you have happen more or less often to make a
change?

--- PAGE 66 ---
When Keith Richards first imagined “Satisfaction” that night in Florida,
he heard it as a slow , bluesy song. In a Los Angeles studio, the Stones
played it faster and it became the iconic song it is.
4. Inter connect
Power: What could you connect to create a more powerful idea?
*Combine: What could you combine with to make something new?
*Network: What could you network into to make something new?
*Transparent: What could you expose to make something new?
*Open: What could you open to the world to see something new
emer ge?
*Partnership: What could you partner with to make something new?
The bow was created and combined with the spear . Partnership made
the spear more powerful and the bow more useful.
5. Alter
*Quality: What could you improve the quality of?
*Design: What could you design dif ferently?
*Performance: How could you increase the performance ability?
*Aesthetics: How could you change the look?
*Experiential: How could you change the experience?
*Standardize: How could you make it fit with other things?
Orville Wright changed the design of their airplane’ s wings to warp, be
movable, and that made controlled, powered flight possible.
6. Make

--- PAGE 67 ---
Processes: What new processes could you create?
Meaning: What new meaning could you create/infuse?
Harness: What could be harnessed to make something new?
Instantiate: What can you instantiate into something new?
Functions: What new functions can you create?
Specialize: What could you make more specialized and focused?
When skateboarders took over empty swimming pools, they created a
new function for the pools.
7. Imagine
*Amplify: How can you imagine amplifying this?
*Easier: How can you imagine making this easier to use, buy , sell,
assemble?
*Negatives: What are the negatives that you could fix?
*Go: Imagine anything you can.
*Sci-fi: Imagine a sci-fi solution or improvement.
*Try: Try using IT  in dif ferent ways to see what happens.
Google engineers wondered: What if the car drives itself?
These seven essential breakthrough questions are a guide through the
creative process. These are questions the naturally creative ask themselves.
But, as O’Connor points out, even they often skip over some of these
questions and steps. That’ s the power of the checklist he referred to. These
questions help individuals or teams engage with a challenge in a creative
way.
You can import something from another discipline. You can rearrange
your concept. You can remove pieces. You can replace pieces. You can

--- PAGE 68 ---
make things happen more or less frequently . You can make things happen
faster or slower . You can redesign the experience of something, the look of
it, the feel of it.
As you move down the questions, they get closer and closer to fully
open, no-holds-barred imagination—from simply looking at the thing itself,
to connecting it to other things, to altering it, making it into something else,
and finally to imagining whatever you can. This progression opens the mind
in steps till the last step, imagine, blows the doors of f and says “Go!”
Pattern Recognition
In the spirit of experimentation rampant during the early 1970s, Indiana
University allowed any student to create and teach a fully accredited course
if it was supported by an academic department and approved by the dean.
A lifelong comic-book lover , Michael Uslan knew exactly what he
wanted to do. He wanted to teach a course on comic books. He garnered the
support of the folklore department, and full of enthusiasm, set out to pitch
the dean. It was not an easy sell. Within minutes, the dean cut him of f.
“Stop. I don’ t buy any of this. I read every issue of Superman  I could get
my hands on as a kid, but all comic books are cheap entertainment for
children—nothing more, nothing less.”
“And that,” Uslan explained to a fascinated Olivia over lunch, “is when
I asked him: ‘Are you familiar with the story of Moses?’” When the dean
answered that indeed he was, Uslan asked him to summarize it.
“So he tells me: ‘The Hebrew people were being persecuted and their
firstborn were being slain. A Hebrew couple placed their infant son in a
little wicker basket and sent it down the river Nile, where he’ s discovered
by an Egyptian family who raise him as their own son. When he grows up
and learns his true heritage, he becomes a hero to his people . . .’”
At this point in the narrative, Uslan interrupted the dean and asked if he
would now , as a childhood fan, summarize the story of Superman. “W ell,
sure,” the dean responded. “Planet Krypton was about to blow up. A
scientist and his wife placed their infant son in a little rocket ship and sent
him to Earth. There he’ s discovered by the Kents, who raise him as their
own son . . .” The dean stopped and stared. The course was approved.

--- PAGE 69 ---
Though it may be hard to remember a time when comic-book heroes
were not multimillion-dollar cinema franchises, when Michael Uslan
bought the movie rights to Batman , superheroes were, in fact, considered as
“a kid’ s thing, dorky , nerdy , like Dungeons and Dragons niche.” Comic-
book-loving Uslan became the producer of all modern Batman films to date
—starting with Tim Burton’ s 1989 epic—and ushered in the modern era of
superhero movies.
With pattern recognition, you associate two concepts: seeing the
underlying patterns and noting their similarity . In recognizing the pattern
underlying the stories of Moses and Superman, the dean suddenly
understood the point that Uslan was making.
As another example, here’ s a summary of Disney’ s vision of the story
of Pocahontas:
In 1607, a ship carrying John Smith arrives in the lush “new
world” of North America. The settlers ar e mining for gold under
the supervision of Governor Ratcliffe. John Smith begins exploring
the new territory and encounters Pocahontas. Initially she is
distrustful of him, but a message fr om her Grandmother W illow
helps her over come her r eservations.
The two begin spending time together , and Pocahontas helps
John understand that all life is valuable, and how all natur e is a
connected cir cle of life. She also teaches him how to hunt, gr ow
crops, and of her cultur e. We learn that her father is Chief
Powhatan, and that she is set to be married to Kocoum, a gr eat
warrior , but a serious man, whom Pocahontas does not desir e.
Over time, John and Pocahontas find they have a love for each
other . Back at the settlement, the men, who believe the natives ar e
savages, plan to attack the natives for their gold. Kocoum tries to
kill John out of jealousy , but he is later killed by the settlers.
As the settlers pr epare to attack, John is blamed by the natives
and is sentenced to death. Just befor e they kill him, the settlers
arrive. Chief Powhatan is nearly killed, and John sustains injuries
from Governor Ratcliffe, who is then br ought to justice.
Pocahontas risks her life to save John. John and Pocahontas

--- PAGE 70 ---
finally have each other , and the two cultur es resolve their
differ ences.
And here is how an observant movie fan, Matt Bateman, altered that
description just slightly to tell the story of James Cameron’ s Avatar .
In 1607  2194, a ship carrying John Smith  Jake Scully arrives in
the lush “new world” of North America  Pandora. The settlers are
mining for gold unobtainium under the supervision of Governor
Ratcliffe  Colonel Quartin. Jake Scully begins exploring the new
territory and encounters Pocahontas  Neytiri. Initially she is
distrustful of him, but a message fr om her Grandmother W illow  the
Tree of Souls helps her over come her r eservations.
The two begin spending time together , and Pocahontas  Neytiri
helps John  Jake understand that all life is valuable, and how all
natur e is a connected cir cle of life. She also teaches him how to
hunt, grow cr ops tame dragons, and of her cultur e. We learn that
her father is Chief Powhatan  Eytucan, and that she is set to be
married to Kocoum  Tsu’Tey, a gr eat warrior , but a serious man,
whom Pocahontas  Neyteri does not desir e. Over time, John  Jake
and Pocahontas  Neyteri find they have a love for each other .
Back at the settlement, the men, who believe the natives ar e
savages, plan to attack the natives  Na’vi for their gold unobtanium.
Kocoum  Tsu’Tey tries to kill John  Jake out of jealousy , but he is
later killed by the settlers.
As the settlers pr epare to attack, John  Jake is blamed by the
natives and is sentenced to death. Just befor e they kill him, the
settlers arrive. Chief Powhatan  Eytucan is nearly  killed, and John
Jake sustains injuries fr om Governor Ratcliffe  Colonel Quanitch,
who is then brought to justice  shot with arr ows. Pocahontas
Neyteri risks her life to save John  Jake. John  Jake and Pocahontas
Neyteri finally have each other , and the two cultur es resolve their
differ ences.

--- PAGE 71 ---
How was the medieval Catholic Church run just like a modern
corporation? Think about it. In many ways, the medieval Catholic Church
was the world’ s first corporation, with the pope as its CEO.11 It had a lar ge
sales force and a mission statement—proselytizing—that demanded the
expansion into new markets. The product they sold? Salvation.
A transnational entity headquartered in Rome, the Church had
franchises in every city , town, and hamlet; from parish churches to Chartres
Cathedral. The College of Cardinals acted like a board of directors,
archbishops functioned much like a bevy of vice presidents, bishops were
the first regional managers, and priests were, of course, salesmen.
And then came the Black Plague. Priests and monks, caring for the sick
and dying, died in great numbers, decimating the sales force. The success of
any corporation is predicated upon the consumers’  belief in the product. The
plague caused millions of people to begin to doubt the Church’ s ability to
provide salvation. Monasteries and parish churches sat abandoned like
empty stadiums. Cemeteries outside church walls became the scene of
orgies. The Church’ s stock had crashed.
And then came the Reformation, appealing to the Catholic Church’ s
own clientele. What was the Reformation but a loss of market share? The
Catholic Church responded to the sudden competition like a good
corporation: they launched the Counter -Reformation, which can be seen as
a massive marketing campaign. The Church started building huge
cathedrals, filling bridges with statues of saints, and commissioning songs.
The Business Case: Million-dollar  Patterns
Think of a hotel. Think of what it does, whom it employs, and what makes
for high customer satisfaction. Friendly , attentive staf f? Attention to detail?
Prompt responsiveness no matter what the hour? Easy check-in? Think of
what a great hotel CEO would be like. What does he or she do to ensure
that guests have a wonderful experience? How does he or she select and
train the staf f?
Now think of a hospital. What business is it in? What makes for high
patient satisfaction? Less time in the admissions waiting room? Friendly
staff? Nurses who show up promptly when the call button is pressed?

--- PAGE 72 ---
What do these two businesses have in common? Both have lar ge
volumes of people checking in and out every day , for example. Which
elements are crucial to the success of both? One could imagine that friendly
and attentive staf f would be important.
And finally , what if you hired that great hotel CEO for the job of
hospital CEO, and asked him to “make it better .” What would he do? How
would he change staf f training? How would he improve staf f selection?
Which best practices could he bring in from his hotel experience?
Guess what? This entire scenario actually played out in real life. In
2006, the Henry Ford West Bloomfield Hospital hired as its new CEO an
executive from Ritz-Carlton hotels who had twenty-five years of experience
in the luxury hospitality business, but not a single day in the hospital
business.12
Gerard van Grinsven focused on the doctor -patient relationship. He had
folding metal chairs placed in patient rooms. When doctors came in, they
were to open the chairs and sit down beside the bed rather than loom over
the patients. It was a simple change that brought the doctors down to the
patients’  level and created a more human interaction.
Van Grinsven opened a wellness center and a hair salon and made them
available to the public. This made the hospital a place for both the sick and
the well, and helped integrate the hospital into the community .
He even created a fast check-in system so that when people were
admitted to the hospital it was quick and easy , like checking into a hotel,
and their room was ready for them. Essentially , van Grinsven brought the
concept of customer service to the hospital industry .
Under his tenure, the Henry Ford West Bloomfield Hospital became
recognized as one of the best hospitals in the country . Someone’ s
breakthrough council was operating well when they recognized the
matching patterns between a hospital and a hotel. That pattern recognition
led to a million-dollar breakthrough.
The U.S. Army Special Forces are tasked with complex, often politically delicate missions.
Special Forces soldiers are highly intelligent, unusually comfortable with uncertainty , and
trained to hold their most primal emotions, like panic, in check. Many of them come
through the Army’ s University of Foreign Military and Cultural Studies, known as Red
Team University , under the skeptical if caring gaze of retired Col. Steve Rotkof f, to learn

--- PAGE 73 ---
cutting-edge cognitive tools to help them on missions. For the past seven years Judah has
been brought in to teach them about the unconscious mental frames that limit their thinking.
During class, the topic of the Arab Spring came up. At this time the uprisings were still
taking place. It was an intense conversation. They had almost all lost friends in battle. They
were not discussing abstract ideas or names on a map, but real places with smells and hills
and dust and people and consequences.
That night Judah was out for beers with three of them. They were still talking about the
possible outcomes. It wasn’ t idle conversation for this smaller group. One of them had
come from a scenario-planning group that was tasked with predicting possible outcomes of
the Arab Spring in order to plan future strategy . The other two soldiers were going to
deploy to the Middle East shortly . When the next round of beers came, they asked Judah
what he thought.
Judah knew better then to of fer up some armchair opinion. Instead he helped them to
see a pattern through association. He pulled up on his phone the Wikipedia entry for the
Revolutions of 1848, which included this information:
The Revolutions of 1848 were a series of political upheavals throughout Europe.
They were democratic in nature, aiming to remove the old power structures.
The revolts first erupted in the cities.
Technological change was revolutionizing the life of the working classes.
Many in the bour geoisie feared and distanced themselves from the working
poor.
The uprisings were led by shaky ad hoc coalitions of reformers, the middle
classes, and workers, which did not hold together for long.
Within a year reactionary forces had regained control, and the revolutions
collapsed.
The Special Forces soldiers immediately saw the similarities to the Arab Spring. City-
centered revolts against the status quo powers; the technological shift of the Internet and
social media; economic inequality; and ad hoc coalitions of the young, the liberal, and the
workers. Judah pointed to how the revolutions ended, with the old regimes still in power ,
only stronger .
In typical understated fashion one of the soldiers said, “Thank you, sir . We’re tracking.”
The historical association helped the soldiers create a more ef fective plan. Rather than
arguing about what might happen, they had a breakthrough as to what would most likely
happen. And in most places it was exactly what happened, from Iran to Bahrain to Egypt.
KEY  TAKEA WAYS
Associative thinking, or making associations between two
seemingly unrelated ideas or subjects, is a key attribute of
breakthrough thinking.

--- PAGE 74 ---
Use the seven essential innovation questions (SEIQ) to create
associations:
How could I look at this dif ferently?
How could I use this in a way it was not intended for?
What if I moved  this into a new context?
What if I connected  this to something completely new and
different?
What if I alter ed a piece of it?
What if I made  something new based on this?
How else could I imagine  using this?
Pattern recognition can help you achieve breakthroughs by seeing
the underlying patterns between your current situation and one that
has already been solved or come to a conclusion.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 75 ---
Chapter 5
                  
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 76 ---
Cultivating Your Garden
Making Your Head an Attractive Place for Breakthrough Butterflies
Your Truly Amazing Brain
Erik Weihenmayer has climbed the “seven summits,” the tallest peaks on all
seven continents. He’ s stood atop Mount Everest in Nepal and Mount
Vinson in Antarctica. As a seven-summit climber , Weihenmayer is a
member of a very small fraternity of elite climbers. But that’ s not what is
most remarkable about his achievement. Not even close. What is truly
remarkable is that Weihenmayer is completely blind.1
How did Weinhenmayer make his way through ice and snow? He
attached a device to his tongue called the BrainPort. The BrainPort takes in
visual information and translates it into electrical impulses, which is exactly
what our eyes do. The BrainPort replaced Weinhenmayer ’s eyes.2
Of course, the BrainPort has no access to the optic nerve, the road your
eyes use to send information to your brain, so its electrical impulses hitch a
ride along the tongue’ s nerve road into the brain.
As Paul Bach-y-Rita, the cocreator of the BrainPort, said, “W e see with
the brain, not with the eyes.”3 If you can get visual information into the
brain, no matter what the delivery method, you can see.
Even though Weihenmayer ’s brain hadn’ t been built to interpret visual
data coming from the tongue, it was able to rewire itself to do just that.
Millions of neurons formed new connections with one another as his brain
physically reshaped itself to understand the new input.
We used to think that after childhood, our brains stopped changing or
developing. This misconception started falling apart when, with the advent
of technology that allowed us to see more deeply inside the brain, we
noticed that neural connections could actually change. Neuroscientists saw

--- PAGE 77 ---
that parts of the brain grow bigger or smaller based on the kinds of activity
people were engaged in.4
In the fall of 2014, a twenty-four -year -old Chinese woman walked into
a hospital complaining of dizziness and nausea. It turned out that her brain
had no cerebellum, a part of the brain essential for language, movement,
and motor control.5 It was, in fact, amazing that this young woman was able
to walk at all. The fact that she learned not only to walk, but also to speak,
use chopsticks, and master complex Chinese calligraphy , are all testaments
to the brain’ s amazing capacity to change itself. Other parts of her brain
were transformed in order to do the work of the missing cerebellum.
A 2012 study shows that in deaf people the part of the brain used for
processing sound gets rewired to process touch and vision.6 And on the
other hand, a 2005 study showed that in blind people, the visual cortex is
rewired to process sound cues.7 Weihenmayer said it felt like his brain was
“rewiring itself.”8 And so it did, because it actually was. This “rewiring”
isn’t a metaphor: actual, physical structures inside our brain change.
This ability of the brain to change itself to compensate for deficiencies,
to change what parts of itself are used for , is just the start of what we now
call neuroplasticity . In fact, our brains remain “plastic,” changeable, our
entire lives. Anytime you encounter a new experience or think a new
thought, your brain creates a new physical connection among neurons.9 Our
experiences, the things we pay attention to, and our behaviors are constant
feedback loops changing the structure of our brains.
Your Brain Is Constantly Restructuring Itself.
Physically  restructuring itself.
Think about that.
Why is this important for breakthroughs? It’ s very simple:
breakthroughs are achieved by the creation of something new , and in our
brains, this means the creation of new ideas, new thoughts, new
understandings. Having a new thought—any kind of new thought—requires
the construction of a new connection inside our brain.10 How fast, how
easily , and how profusely we can create new connections greatly impacts
how many breakthroughs we’ll have. The ability to create new connections
inside our brain—that’ s neuroplasticity .

--- PAGE 78 ---
The Higher  Our  Level of Neur oplasticity , the Higher  Our
Chances of Br eakthr oughs
When we asked Astro Teller, the head of Google’ s semisecret research and
development facility known as X, how he hires people, he answered, “I hire
the most plastic people I can find.”11 This is because Teller knows that
having a breakthrough depends upon your ability to physically build a novel
set of neural connections.
As babies, our brains are highly plastic because absolutely everything
we encounter is new: eating, pooping, language, laughter , crawling,
walking. Every single day our brains form new structures to understand
what we are encountering: babies perform the equivalent of an Ironman
triathlon workout for the brain.
But as we grow up, novelty becomes scarce. Daily routine sets in: same
job, same colleagues, same neighborhood, same friends, same TV shows,
same politics, and so on. We’ve gone from doing the equivalent of a daily
mental Ironman workout to being neural couch potatoes. Our brains have
gotten out of shape when it comes to building neural connections. When
learning something new feels hard, we decide that you can’ t teach an old
dog new tricks. In reality , it’s not that our brains are no longer capable of
change, but that it’ s out of practice because we haven’ t been working out.12
But thinking that it’ s too late, that you should have started when you
were young, is akin to sitting on your couch watching TV for a year , failing
to do a push-up, and saying, “W ell, I guess I’m just weak now . I’d better get
used to it. I’m going to double down on this couch-sitting thing.”
You might be tempted at this point to go join one of the increasingly
popular “brain gyms” of fering computerized pattern-spotting or memory
games. Unfortunately , research so far shows that they make you much
better at playing these games, but not necessarily at anything else.13
The best way to improve your plasticity is to expose yourself to new
things that challenge your brain to build fresh connections. When you keep
having the same thought over and over again, and perhaps describe it as
being caught in a loop, the physical reality is that you are firing the same
path of neurons over and over again. But when you experience or think
about something unfamiliar , your brain physically builds a new structure,

--- PAGE 79 ---
and it is this ability that enables us to have original thoughts and to create
breakthroughs.
Our brains are shaped by the things we pay attention to.14 Any new
experience will physically create a new connection. And with your 100
billion neurons, each with the ability to make thousands of connections,
there are more potential connections inside your brain than there are stars in
the sky .
Befor e We Start: Getting Your Brain Ready for  Breakthr ough
Thinking
We live in an age of distraction. Before the advent of the Internet, there was
a limit to the amount of information we could physically get our hands on.
Now , we face an infinite avalanche of information every time we go online.
Leo Babauta, author of the Zen Habits  blog and father of six, told us: “W e
are increasingly up to our necks in the stream of information, in the
crossfire of the battle for our attention, and engaged in a harrying blur of
multitasking activity .”15
What’ s worse, this battle for our attention is addictive because all our
digital communication channels engage our dopamine loops. A common
misconception holds that dopamine is related to experiences of pleasure. As
increasing numbers of studies show , the famous neurotransmitter is
responsible not for pleasure, but rather for motivation, desire, or drive.
With every e-mail, text, Snapchat, or Instagram notification, a
dopamine sur ge drives us to click or open with the anticipation of pleasure.
Our electronics have turned us all into gamblers, only instead of pulling the
arm of a slot machine or rolling the dice, we check our in-boxes and
phones. As Kelly McGonigal explains in her wonderful book The W illpower
Instinct,  evolution is using the promise of happiness, not happiness itself, to
keep us striving and struggling and checking our phones.16
The problem is that breakthrough thinking is driven by this same
dopamine-induced expectancy of happiness, excitement, achievement.
Dopamine is what drives us to look for solutions, new approaches, or
discoveries. It gives us the curiosity that drives so many breakthroughs. But

--- PAGE 80 ---
if we get caught in an electronic communications dopamine loop, we are
wasting our neurochemical drive.
In essence, dopamine creates the motivation that is needed to create
breakthroughs. Don’ t waste it on e-mail and social media.
Plasticity Exer cises
The point of neuroplasticity excercises is not to make you better at the
activities themselves. Terry Gross, the famous host of the interview radio
show Fresh Air, has taken singing lessons for years. She told her teacher
right from the start that her goal was not to become a good singer . “I just
want to be inside a song, to the extent that I can be. To just have my body
inside a song.”17
In Gross’ s case, singing does relate to her line of work, as she’ s the
voice of a show . But aside from that, music is one of the great powerhouses
for increasing plasticity , and for Gross, who has to interview people from
all walks of life, finding connections is a great way to come up with
interesting questions.
Anything new you learn will promote your brain’ s plasticity . But
learning something new while doing something physical doesn’ t just
increase plasticity , it also increases the size of the neural circuit you are
creating, which means—you guessed it—more new connections.
In one study on this subject, when high jumpers imagined themselves
clearing the bar successfully , they were 35 percent more successful. But
when they imagined themselves clearing the bar and moved one of their
fingers at the same time, their success went up by 45 percent.18 This is why
many of the following tools involve some form of movement.
These tools are not exercises in breakthrough thinking, but rather
exercises in plasticity . Stronger muscles will help you when the time comes
to compete.
Experiment with movement
Use your nondominant hand for a variety of activities. Brush your teeth, use a fork,
use the key to open your house, write your name. This is also a great exercise to
experience what it’ s like to build new connections—you’ll really feel neuroplasticity at
work.

--- PAGE 81 ---
Experiment with taste
Go to a restaurant and order something you’ve never had there before. Really taste it.
What’ s different about it? Your brain has to create new connections in order to build a
structure to represent new flavors.
Make a dish, but leave all the salt out of the recipe. Taste it. Notice how the lack of
salt changes the flavor . Now add just a little. And taste. Then add a little bit more. Inch
your way forward until you’ve added the perfect amount of salt.
Experiment with sight
Take a new route to work, the market, or home. Notice as many new things as you
can. The next day , take the exact same route, but this time try to predict the landmarks
you will see.
Watch twenty minutes of a foreign film without subtitles. See what you can piece
together about the plot. Are you watching facial expressions more? How well can you
understand the emotional state of the characters even without their words? A few of our
favorites are:
Life Is Beautiful
Amelie
The House of Flying Daggers
Sit in a cof fee shop while pretending to read this book, and watch the people around
you. Don’ t worry , they’ll be too focused on whatever they’re doing to notice you. Look
at their facial expressions. Look at how they hold their bodies. Are they moving fast or
slow? Do they seem jumpy , nervous, neurotic? Now pick one person and imagine what
his morning has been like. If he’ s on a computer , try to imagine what he is typing. Is it
for work? Is he searching for a new home? Is he shopping? Writing an old flame?
Building a narrative with a who, what, why , when, and how is great plasticity work.
Experiment with sound
Listen to music from another culture, whether Bollywood dance music, African blues,
or traditional Afghani music. Lose yourself in completely dif ferent tempos. If you are
home alone, try to dance. When you try to figure out how to move your body to an
unfamiliar rhythm, you force your brain to translate new sounds into movement.
Practice Plasticity Like Einstein
Einstein was famous for performing “thought experiments.” He would
imagine that certain things were true about the universe and figure out what
would happen in a universe like that. These thought experiments promote
associative thinking. Here are some you can try .

--- PAGE 82 ---
Gravity:  Imagine gravity were to stop working after 10 P.M.
Now , what does the world look like? Are our beds on the ceiling?
How does this change the sports we play? How do we transport
goods? Do people have parties in trees covered by nets? Is there
a new business making those nets? Are there lawsuits when the
nets fail and people end up floating aimlessly all night? Are
movies made where true love is found when these people float
down in some random place in the morning? Do teenagers
sabotage the nets to float of f for adventure?
Social norms:  Let’s say that you are allowed to kick someone if
they truly annoy you. Now what does the world look like? How
do you prove the person truly annoyed you? Are there special
courts to determine whether you were truly annoyed? How hard
are you allowed to kick someone? Are special shoes made that
allow you to kick without leaving a mark? Is there a social peace
movement to stop the kicking?
Age:  Imagine you just discovered that you are guaranteed to live
to be 130 years old and remain in excellent physical health. You
might notice an internal reaction, perhaps a fleeting thought of
“Wait, I thought I would live till . . .” It’ s natural to
unconsciously set expectations. Did you know you had been
using that age as a general barometer? Now try to imagine what
your life would look like. How does that af fect the decisions you
make? Will you stay in your current career the whole time? Will
you remain in your current marriage or relationship? How would
society change if everyone were to live to 130? Would everyone
be expected to have more than one marriage? How long would
people wait to have children? Would everyone have to wait their
turn to have children due to overpopulation from longer life
spans? Would people auction of f their right to have children to
others?
Magic:  Maybe you’ve heard tales of cities that stand entirely on
stilts with suspended walkways for sidewalks. Or a city that
consists of nothing but plumbing, pipes, showerheads, bathtubs,

--- PAGE 83 ---
and valves connected in a maze of metal devoid of any buildings.
Other cities trade only in memories, and you can only buy things
by sharing memories. Now you design one of these magical
cities. What does it look like? How do the people interact in this
city? What are the rules?19 Here’ s a way to increase your brain
plasticity even more: Imagine you are in the scene, like a
character in a highly realistic video game. You’re walking down
the street, opening doors, turning your head left and right to look
at new things. Imagine putting your hand up to feel the wind.
Walk down one of the main streets and hear the traf fic.
Now let’ s get personal. This exercise is not only great for boosting your
plasticity , it’s also a great tool in business and in life. Think of the last
meeting you attended. Where was it? What was it about? Who was there?
Who spoke? How did you feel throughout the meeting?
Now , using your recently heightened powers of imagination, pull back
and watch the meeting as if you were an invisible observer who can see the
whole group (including you). What do you see now? Look at the faces of
everyone around the table, including your own. Remember , you’re an
invisible observer in the back of the room. Was anyone bored? Disgruntled?
How was the leader of the meeting?
Ready for the next jump? This one is key . Think of the most junior
person at this meeting. (If this was you, pick the most senior .) Don’ t just put
yourself in her shoes: Get into her skin, see from behind her eyes. How was
she feeling? Who was she looking at? What was she concerned about?
If you’d prefer a nonwork situation, imagine a family gathering, such as
Thanksgiving or Christmas. How were you feeling? What annoyed you?
What made you happy? Now imagine yourself an invisible guest watching
the dinner . How is the group experiencing it? Who is looking at whom?
Who is eating? Who is serving? Who is bored? Now pick the youngest (or
oldest) family member . What was it like for them?
Filling Your Garden: Sow Mor e Than You Need
In the early 1890s, everybody wanted the newest technological marvel.
Democratic and af fordable, the bicycle could cut people’ s commute to work

--- PAGE 84 ---
in half and enable them to enjoy the countryside on the weekend.
Thousands of bicycle mechanics appeared as if overnight, looking to
make bicycles lighter , safer , more comfortable, and easier to produce. They
would tinker with ball bearings, rolled steel, dif ferential gears, air -filled
tires, and so on.20
Many of these enthusiasts would later use what they had learned in
bicycle workshops to create greater transportation breakthroughs. The
Wright Brothers, for instance, were both bicycle mechanics.
One of these amateur bicycle mechanics watched as mass production
took hold in the realm of personal transportation, and cyclists lobbied for
better roads to be built. That man was Henry Ford, and by combining the
new concepts of mass production with the new tools invented for bicycles,
he gave us the modern automobile industry .
The more raw material you give your brain, the more connections it can
make. So when you read an article online, follow the hyperlinks and see
where they take you. Filling your garden is an experience in meandering.
You may end up far afield, and that’ s okay , because you don’ t know what
might be of interest. You can’t know . This, of course, can be frustrating to
those of us who want to know that what we’re doing is generating value,
not “wasting time.” Unfortunately , if you want to get to breakthroughs, you
need to accept that you’ll never know what ends up being valuable.
When farmers sow seeds, they don’ t know which will germinate, which
won’ t, and how many of those that do germinate will actually bear fruit. It’ s
nearly impossible to ensure a 100 percent germination rate. So what do they
do? They sow more than they need. In military parlance, this is called
redundancy . And unlike in management, where redundancy is assumed to
be a bad thing, in the world of technology it’ s what could save your work
(have you ever lost data for lack of a backup?).
“In the technology world of the cloud, we assume the commodity
hardware we are building things on will fail, so we have complex failure
plans. Data stored in the cloud will often be broken into hundreds of pieces,
with three or even six copies of each piece,” explains Microsoft’ s Kevin
Sauer .
If you want to have more breakthroughs, you need to accept the need
for redundancy . Accept that you won’ t know which seeds will bear fruit

--- PAGE 85 ---
until harvest time. Some may germinate, some may not. Some may
germinate, but not bear fruit. You have to be willing to bear that uncertainty .
(Chapter 9 will give you the tools to handle it better .)
When we tell you to immerse yourself in your line of work or interest,
we don’ t mean merely working hard at your job in advertising or sitting
down at the piano for two hours a day . Get a clear understanding of the
underlying principles, the schools of thought, the ways things have been
done or attempted, and succeeded or failed.
It’s important to talk to people doing the same thing as you are. Bell
Labs, the famed research center to which we owe the transistor , the
calculator , laser technology , UNIX, and many of today’ s most essential
technologies, was famous for strongly encouraging its newest junior
members to knock on the door of Nobel Prize winners and ask questions of
“the guy who wrote the book.”21
As for how to approach people and establish the relationships you need,
you’ll find information in the resources section of this book, including
Olivia’ s The Charisma Myth,  of course, and Keith Ferrazzi’ s Never Eat
Alone , the “bible of networking.” Keith, the CEO of a research institute
studying human behavior change, illustrates convincingly that relationships
are the backbone of all success in business and in life, and shows you step-
by-step how to build the relationships you will need. We highly recommend
it.
Popular mythology would have you believe that breakthroughs are a
solo endeavor . Most often, there are many contributors to major insights.
The garden-filling phase is not just about extracting information from other
people. You also have to share your latest challenge: give people the context
behind the questions you’re asking, the problems you’re working on, what’ s
making them so dif ficult, and what you’re hoping to achieve.
Your mindset when sowing seeds must be open and unprejudiced,
because you never know who might have an interesting tidbit for you.
Remember that early components of breakthroughs don’ t look like
breakthroughs—they look like miscellaneous pieces of information. Be
open and curious.
One trick is to keep certain topics at the forefront of your mind at all
times so you’ll be more likely to notice when relevant pieces of information

--- PAGE 86 ---
pass by . Another trick is to draw people into talking about something
they’re passionate about. Ask them when they first encountered this
passion. Did they always love it or did it grow on them? What is it about the
activity that speaks to them? You may hear about the history of the thing,
the nuances, the best practices. These are excellent ingredients to gather .
You should also read books that are adjacent to your area of interest and
talk to people doing something dif ferent but related. If you’re a manager in
a healthcare company , you might talk to a manager at a retail company or at
a hospitality company . If you’re a business manager , learn about how to run
a preschool.
If you’re in marketing or sales, it might be helpful to read a book about
P. T. Barnum, or about William Randolph Hearst’ s role in starting the
Spanish-American War. But it could also be just as helpful to read about the
publication of Thomas Paine’ s pamphlet Common Sense  and the American
Revolution.
If you’re a manager , it could be helpful to read how the Mongols
structured their armies and how they created a sense of connection among
soldiers from varied cultures. Or about the practices of traditional cultures,
from the Iroquois to Australian Aboriginals.
If you’re a scientist, it could be helpful to read anything in the history
of science. But it can also be helpful to read about the history of philosophy
as a way to see the dif ferent modes of thought that held people in check.
You might discover something about the limits of your own thinking.
Science fiction has also been known to be a great inspiration for many
scientists.
If you’re an entrepreneur , read about the history of Silicon Valley and
the entrepreneurs who came before you. You never know what ideas might
be sparked by reading about your predecessors.
StartX is Stanford’ s incubator for new technology companies. It is made up of young,
smart, ambitious people looking to disrupt any and every industry . Many of them have
more ideas than they know what to do with. One company was working on wearable
technology . During a wandering conversation, the cofounders mentioned to Judah they had
another idea for smart fabric. It was not the product they were in StartX to develop; it was a
new idea. The problem was that although they knew what their technology could do, they
had no knowledge about materials and temperature changes.

--- PAGE 87 ---
Judah introduced them to designers of ski clothing at another client of his, the North
Face. People who design clothing for skiing have to think a lot about materials and
temperature. Its users are in the cold but are very active, which raises their body
temperature. The wearable tech founders and the North Face designers were working in
adjacent fields. The wearable tech founders were able to take great strides in their designs
by learning from the North Face designers.
We’d love to tell you that they are bringing their smart fabric to market, but they found
their technology wasn’ t ready . That’ s the risk when working with incubators and with
breakthroughs in general. Sometimes things don’ t work out. That’ s not what breakthrough
thinking is about. Breakthrough thinking is about learning and trying again. (Part two digs
deep into the skills necessary for breakthrough resilience.)
To create (or discover) his theories of relativity , Einstein didn’ t just lock
himself in a room and think. Instead, he had a group of friends with whom
he talked with almost every night.22 They called themselves the Olympia
Academy: Michele Besso, Maurice Solovine, Conrad Habicht, and
Einstein’ s wife, Mileva.
On warm nights, they’d walk the streets of Bern and sit on the
riverbank. Other times they’d climb to the top of Mount Gurten, lie on their
backs, look up at the stars, and talk until dawn. Then they’d amble back into
town and sit at a café, fueling themselves with cof fee and ideas.
While the Olympia Academy had very little structure, the members
demanded total commitment. When Maurice Solovine skipped a meeting to
attend a music recital, Einstein and Habicht went to his house, ate all his
food, and smoked a pipe (Einstein) and cigars (Habicht) until the apartment
resembled the inside of a chimney . Finally , they piled all his furniture and
books on top of his bed. Such was the retribution for giving preference to
bourgeois distractions over the Academy .
The group’ s members were from fields as diverse as poetry and
philosophy , and it was these conversations that helped to break open how he
thought so that he could then “break open the universe.” In order to be
innovative, Einstein first had to shift the way he actually thought, and that
meant ranging far afield from physics.
Literature, art, and music aren’ t thought of as “actionable” or “useful” when
we’re in problem-solving mode, but are extremely useful to our genius
council when we’re on the road to breakthroughs. Nadya Direkova, an MIT

--- PAGE 88 ---
graduate and mathematics whiz who works at Google X and created the
Design Sprint program within Google, has been known to take classes
ranging from photography to “how to be a mermaid in the world.”23
If you find yourself in conversation with someone from an adjacent
field, here are some good questions to ask:
If you were describing what you do for a living to a six-year -old,
what would you say?
Do you have any kind of personal philosophy or guiding
principles that help you?
What do you think makes you good at what you do? (They’ll
demur but be flattered.)
If I were starting out in your profession, what advice would you
give me?
Did you always know you wanted to be an X, or were you
interested in something else? (If they always knew , ask why it
called to them so strongly . If they wanted to be something else,
ask what linked their first interest to their second.)
If you’re concerned about falling down a rabbit hole, try the Oxford
Very Short Introduction Series. These are brief books, each about a hundred
pages, that of fer concise overviews on myriad topics from rivers to Tibetan
Buddhism to molecular biology . Choose two or three of these on varied
topics and read them. The advantage is that these booklets are limited,
physically , in the amount of information they contain.
When you want a fresh insight, you’re guaranteed to be surprised by a
different age group, social class, or culture. There’ s also the option of
drawing solutions from nature, the well-known tactic called biomimicry we
mentioned earlier .
The first Japanese bullet train, which could reach speeds of up to 180
miles per hour , had a short, snub nose. At such an incredible speed, the train
often built up hurricane-force winds when going through tunnels, shaking
nearby houses and even shattering windows.
The engineers tasked with redesigning the nose to create less air
buildup found the solution in mimicking the beak of the kingfisher .24

--- PAGE 89 ---
The kingfisher ’s beak enables it to dive straight into the water and yet
barely make a splash. With its almost Pinocchio-long nose, the new bullet
train looks a bit comical. But it no longer causes hurricanes.
It’s key to provide your genius council with a wide variety of examples
of how others have done what you’re seeking to do. The more varied, the
better: these “others” who have the solution you need could well end up
being insects.
In Harare, Zimbabwe, the Eastgate Centre shopping mall and of fice
building uses only 10 percent of the ener gy that a similar -sized building
would use to heat and cool itself.25 It does this by mimicking the design of
termite castles, which have the remarkable ability to maintain a steady
internal temperature regardless of the outside temperature. Like a termite
castle, the Eastgate Centre regulates its temperature by drawing cool air in
at the bottom of the building while venting warmer air at the top, thanks to
large fans at both ends of the building.

--- PAGE 90 ---
© Matt Buck

--- PAGE 91 ---
© Piti Sirisriro
One form of breakthrough is simply recognizing the ready-made
solutions waiting to be plucked from the natural world. Waste treatment
plants, for instance, used to face the problem of minerals growing on the
inside of pipes and slowing down the flow . Traditionally , engineers had to
flush the pipes with toxic chemicals to clean them out.
The buildup is calcium carbonate, which happens to be the exact same
material from which seashells are made.26 During their growing phase,
seashells use a template of proteins that pull in ions from the seawater and
hold them in place in a self-assembling crystal. When they reach maturity ,
the shells exude a protein to stop the crystallization. Today , a commercially
made and environmentally friendly substance called TPA mimics this
protein that inhibits crystallization.
Throughout this process, consider collecting these ideas in a file. This
can be in the notes on your phone, a file on your computer , or an old school
notebook. You want to create a central place where you can look through
the ideas you’ve gathered in order to focus your breakthrough geniuses and

--- PAGE 92 ---
remind them of all the raw material they have to work with. A simple and
powerful tool when you’re struggling for a breakthrough is reading through
your gathered ideas, and then using one of the breakthrough exercises we
will recommend in the following chapter .
The breakthrough experience is both a social, outward-focused
experience and a solitary , inward-focused one. Gathering information is
external: even if you’re just sitting at your computer reading articles, the
information is coming in from the outside.
We encourage you to go out and talk to other people during the garden-
filling phase, because when we engage with other people, we connect our
associative networks to other associative networks, and that creates a whole
new field of possibilities. So we research, we read, we listen, we talk, we
argue, we explain, we get pointed to new sources of information, we watch
videos, go to lectures, have lunch with dif ferent people, all in the service of
collecting ideas, facts, and information.
KEY  TAKEA WAYS
Brains remain plastic throughout life. We all have the ability to think
new thoughts. Although most of us are out of shape neurologically ,
we can increase our plasticity .
Don’ t waste your breakthrough dopamine, your internal drive, on e-
mail and phone distraction overload.
Exercise is a magic bullet for raising plasticity and mood. Just five
minutes at a time can help.
Plasticity rises when doing, learning, and experiencing new things.
Experiment with new movements, new tastes, new sights, new
sounds, new stories. Moving while experiencing something new
turbochar ges the plasticity .
Try Einstein-style thought experiments. Imagine crazy situations or
worlds with dif ferent laws and see where it takes you.
Gather lar ge amounts of information on a chosen subject or problem
so you can immerse yourself in that field of knowledge. Some of
what you gather will be useful and actionable. Most of what you
gather will not directly lead anywhere, and this is okay .

--- PAGE 93 ---
Look to others. Engaging others will allow you to learn from their
perspective and insights. Seek input from people in other fields and
professions, even if it may seem they cannot help you.
Look to nature. Mother nature is a 4.5-billion-year research and
development project. The practice of biomimicry can teach us a lot.
Remember to keep notes in a central place for later reference.
Consider a notebook, or an online app like Evernote, which allows
you to sync notes to multiple devices (phone, laptop, desktop)
simultaneously .
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 94 ---
Chapter 6
                  
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 95 ---
What’s in Your Net?
How to Evaluate the Output of Genius Mode
SO YOU’VE GONE through the breakthrough experience, and you’ve come up
with one—or many!—ideas that have breakthrough potential. Do you go
right out into the world and bet the house on it? No. This is where you bring
your executive back to the front of fice. You may have heard the saying
“Write drunk, edit sober .” Now is the time to edit sober .
Edward de Bono is one of the world’ s foremost experts on how we
think. He is a psychologist, a physician, and an author who teaches at the
universities of Oxford, Cambridge, and Harvard. One of his most famous
tools is called Six Thinking Hats. In this classic tool, a team that wants to
brainstorm is given six dif ferent-colored hats, each standing for a dif ferent
frame of mind, a dif ferent way of looking at a situation and generating
possible solutions.
The blue hat focuses on the process, managing time, keeping the big
picture in mind.
The white  hat focuses on facts on the ground, figures, metrics, the
reality of the situation.
The red hat focuses on the emotional resonance of the situation and the
solution, and how others might be impacted, including your empathy and
fears.
The green hat focuses on creative thinking, new possibilities, new
perspectives on the situation and the solution, and on refining new ideas.
The black  hat has a skeptical outlook and considers risks, potential
problems and obstacles of the solution, or weaknesses in the plan.
The yellow  hat, on the other hand, is an optimistic outlook, positive
thinking, a focus on the benefits and best-case scenarios of possible
solutions.

--- PAGE 96 ---
Using the Six Hats to Evaluate Potential Br eakthr oughs
We’ve adapted these tools to help you sift through dif ferent ideas, to catch
which are the potential breakthroughs and which are not.
Though some breakthroughs are immediately recognizable as such,
often major breakthroughs come through a series of smaller breakthroughs.
We wind our way along the path, eventually coming to the big moment.
This evaluation process will help you recognize and capture ideas that don’ t
burst forth onto the scene but rather appear quietly . It helps you know
whether they are signposts on the road to breakthrough, or just gibberish.
Let’s say you’ve had a potential breakthrough about what your team
needs to do. You’ve realized you need to encourage more risk-taking while
maintaining limits on those risks. Choose which hat you are going to put on,
and then look at your ideas from that point of view . You can make your way
along in any order .
You might first choose the red hat, the emotional one. You could ask
yourself how the team is going to feel about being encouraged to take more
risks. Will they be frightened? Feel pressured? Feel liberated? This makes
you realize that how they feel will in part depend on how you present the
issue.
Then you put on the black hat of the skeptic, the problem seeker , and
you see the potential risks—the team going over budget, missing deadlines,
building useless models all in the name of taking risks. It could turn into a
situation in which people are just doing weird stuf f to appear as if they’re
taking risks. Then, if you reprimand them, they’d feel confused and
betrayed: you encouraged them to take risks and then punished them for
doing it. You’d lose trust.
So you put on the white hat and look at the facts on the ground. How
much time and budget can you allocate to risk? What areas should not be
touched? This will help you create constraints.
You put on the green hat to think creatively about those constraints.
What are reasonable limits and guidelines you could give the team ahead of
time? You could limit how far anyone could go with a new idea. You could
establish a system that all new ideas had to move through in order to slow
down the process, with kill points along the way where new , risky ideas get
assessed before they can move on.

--- PAGE 97 ---
Then you put on your yellow hat and look at the benefits of each of
these new ideas. How might they play out successfully?
You could put your red hat on again, the emotional one, and look at
how these new guidelines might be received by your team; then put on the
black hat again and see how this might go sideways.
It’s then time to put on the blue hat, the process one, to make sure that
you are still on topic and on point.
You can cycle through these dif ferent hats, these dif ferent perspectives,
as many times as is helpful.
The next step is to bring the breakthrough to people who “wear”
different hats. So you find a red hat person, someone who is good at seeing
how things af fect other people, someone with a high emotional quotient
(EQ), and you present the situation and your possible solutions to get his
red hat feedback.
Then you find a black hat person, someone who is a good critical
thinker and skeptic. You run your stuf f by her and see what issues she points
out. You get black hat feedback.
You continue through the other hats, collecting feedback from dif ferent
people in very specific, directed ways that help you sift your idea.
To evaluate your breakthroughs, to know which are worth pursuing,
which need further iterations, and what’ s still lacking, it is absolutely
critical for you to get feedback from others.
One of the startups at StartX came up with an app that could track your movements via
your smartphone and then construct a narrative of your day , your week, or your month for
you. This app was not what the startup founders had gotten accepted into StartX to work on
and they weren’ t sure if they should move forward with it.
This was a perfect opportunity to use de Bono’ s Six Thinking Hats. Judah identified six
people in the incubator who were all naturals at one of the thinking hat perspectives. First
he brought in the white hat, the one good at the facts on the ground. She helped the team
lay out their idea in clear and concise language. Then he brought in a person good at yellow
hat thinking, best-case scenarios, and optimism, and the team shared their white hat pitch.
The yellow hat person spun out a number of possible ways this app could be world
changing. Parents could make a record of their children’ s lives before they have memories.
Children could watch narratives of their parents when their parents were teenagers.
Politicians could be held accountable. Researchers could study troves of data about human
behavior .
Then he brought in the green hat person, the creative thinker . This person wondered if
the app could be used to track pets’  days, or what would happen if you created a mesh

--- PAGE 98 ---
network of narratives so you could see the interweaving experience of a group of friends or
an entire junior high class. What could it teach us about our behaviors as a group of people?
At this point the founders were getting very excited. But then Judah brought in the black
hat person, the one who was good at being skeptical. The black hat thinker pointed out that
the technology wasn’ t ready to track that many interweaving stories. And besides, why
would anyone pay for this? They’d expect it to be free. And so how would you sell ads on
it?
The fun wasn’ t over yet. Next came the red hat thinker , the emotional one. The red hat
thinker shuddered a bit. He felt it was creepy , like being followed all the time. And if you
turned it on and then of f and then on again there’d be gaps in your narrative that made it
seem like you were hiding something. Very 1984.
But all was not lost. Judah brought in a blue hat thinker , someone who asked the
founders what their big picture was, what the essence of the app was. With that question the
green hat, the creative thinker , was brought back in. They traded ideas back and forth and
realized that they had assumed the app would track individuals in their daily lives. But it
could be used for research. Research had come up before but had been for gotten. It could
be used for patients, for diagnoses, for any number of tar geted applications where the user
was willing and happy for the help.
The developers hit a number of bumps in the road along the way . We helped them with
their breakthrough resilience. One day they met a fellow entrepreneur working in medical
technology . As they spoke they realized that most medical technology was focused on
biometrics, heart rate, sweat, and oxygenation. But the ins and outs of your activity , the
narrative of your day , and how that might af fect your health was blue ocean territory . They
merged their companies and are in the midst of a round of getting funding.
Getting feedback is something that Professor Alex “Sandy” Pentland,
director of the MIT  Science and Human Dynamics labs, and Olivia’ s
favorite scientist, strongly recommends you do in person. “When things
matter ,” he told us, “you need ‘rich’  channels: nuanced, interactive channels
that allow for serendipity and spontaneity . And [you need] the immediacy
of face-to-face interactions, when both people can be talking at once,
getting excited and talking over one another . You need to be able to get the
feel of an idea.”1
This is why MIT  does not have campuses in any other location in the
world: they want their people to interact face-to-face. (Y es, it is often
pointed out the irony that the “nerdiest university in the world” is the one
that insists on physical interaction.)
Pentland, who also helped create and direct the MIT  Media Lab,
recommends that you seek feedback from one person at a time, not from a
group that will blitz you with feedback. “Think of Minsky and all those
other ‘lone geniuses,’” he says. “Y es, they’re slightly odd, and curious

--- PAGE 99 ---
about everything. And they get superexcited, and tend to talk about
whatever the latest thing that excited them was, with everybody . But they
talk to people serially . The thing they bring to person A gets modified by A’s
feedback, and what they get as a result is what they bring to person B, so
they keep testing and validating their concepts, and the concepts build
together into a story .”
Pentland is describing mode switching of a dif ferent kind. Instead of
switching between our EN and our DN, Pentland has us switching between
talking to people and retreating back to our heads to ponder .
And this kind of mode switching hints at a paradox at the heart of how
we have breakthroughs. On the one hand we need to be alone for the
innovation to come to us. Story after story tells of people being alone when
they have their moment of insight. An insight tends to be a quiet, internal
event. But on the other hand, we need to be immersed in a flow of ideas. We
need to hear what other people are thinking and doing. We need to take in
lots of dif ferent things.
Pentland’ s group has performed the most advanced research on idea
flow within groups and or ganizations, and his book is highly recommended
to any executive tasked with innovation. (Y ou’ll find them listed in the
resources section of this book.) He speaks of bees who pollinate every
flower they come across. At every flower , they pick up the best pollen, and
bring it to the next one.
A helpful tip to keep in mind: some flowers have a lot more pollen than
others. When you are looking to talk to people about your breakthrough
idea, talk to a diversity of people. But also look for people with as
multifaceted a background as possible. Former Manpower CEO David
Arkless is a good example: he’ s worked in senior positions inside
multinational corporations, he’ s worked outside of them as a consultant,
he’s worked on getting more investment opportunities inside China, and on
teaching mar ginalized youth in the Middle East and North Africa the skills
needed to join the world economy .

--- PAGE 100 ---
Have a Cr ew
Many breakthroughs come from people who have a trusted crew they run
their ideas by . As we’ve seen, Einstein had his Olympia Academy . J.R.R.
Tolkien and C. S. Lewis used to read their drafts of The Lor d of the Rings
and The Chr onicles of Narnia to each other . Nathaniel Hawthorne and
Herman Melville were good friends and wrote many letters to one another
about their work.
It is important to have a crew , a group of people you trust and who
understand what it is you are working on. This crew makes you feel safe
sharing your thoughts and, ideally , asks you questions that help clarify your
ideas or push you forward into new areas.
When Keith Richards first listened to his opening eight bars of
“Satisfaction” he was unimpressed. Mick Jagger described it this way: “It
sounded like a folk song when we first started working on it and Keith
didn’ t like it much, he didn’ t want it to be a single, he didn’ t think it would
do very well. I think Keith thought it was a bit basic. I don’ t think he really
listened to it properly . He was too close to it and just felt it was a silly kind
of rif f.”2
Richards didn’ t see the breakthrough potential of his song. It took his
bandmates to help him see it and refine it. Similarly , the first attempt at
recording the song didn’ t go well. It took a second session to get it right.
Your crew can act as a backup net to catch the butterflies that you don’ t see
or that get away .
Judah was having a conversation with Andreas Ramos, who has been an
engineer in Silicon Valley for over twenty years. He was telling a story
about a side project his cubiclemate was working on in the mid-1990s. The
cubiclemate was talking about his idea and Ramos and a third man started
shooting ideas back and forth and decided they’d help write the code for
their coworker Craig and his list. Yes, that was the foundation of Craigslist.
Biomimic Your Brain
So how do you build your trusted crew? Who should be in it? For starters,
anyone who seems to excel at one or two of the Six Thinking Hat styles.

--- PAGE 101 ---
But there’ s a deeper question. What skills should you gather in the room to
increase the chances of a breakthrough?
When viewed from the point of view of design, Nature is a master
class, and your brain is a design that has been iterated, tested, adapted, and
iterated again for millions of years. If architects can learn how to save
energy from termite castles, and engineers can learn about aerodynamics
from a kingfisher ’s beak, think about what you could accomplish by
biomimicking the brain’ s breakthrough council.
Mimicking the way your DN works, here are other qualities and
personality types to look for in your crew or your team:
QUALITIES:
Empathy:  You’re looking for people who are skilled at taking other
perspectives and have a natural ability to feel how others might respond
to a new idea. You want the people others go to when they’re having a
hard time.
Contextual associations:  You want people who have worked in
different industries, people who have dual majors in subjects like math
and poetry , or French and economics. You need people who have a deep
hobby in something apart from their job, like computer programmers
who practice Tai Chi or executives who paint.
Memory:  Historians could be good for this, or people interested in
history . People who worked on previously successful breakthroughs in
a similar space are helpful, as is anyone who has been there before and
is reflective about his experience.
PERSONALITY  TYPES:
Mavens:  You want someone on your crew who has her finger on the
pulse of the market, the company , the culture. You want someone who
knows what is expected to happen in five years and is already up on the
thing that will be huge in six months. This person can gauge your
breakthrough and give thoughts about whether or not it is new enough,

--- PAGE 102 ---
different enough, and is pointing in the same direction as the cultural
arrow .
Makers:  You want the mechanical engineers, the designers, the
builders, the people who will draw and build mock-ups and get very
concrete about an idea. You need to stay grounded in reality and in what
is feasible.
Theorists:  You need people who have a deep knowledge of the subject
even if they’ve never tried building something but have only studied it.
Theorists can often of fer deep pattern recognition and new insights that
those only concerned with applying their idea might miss. This means
including people who might be a little older .
Generalists:  These people have a wide range of knowledge and as such
they are very good at acquiring new information. They learn new things
and integrate them and connect them to other things. They can be very
helpful just listening to topics they don’ t know about. Their lack of
knowledge leaves them open to helpful connections and insights.
There are two more steps you can take to biomimic the brain’ s
breakthrough process with your teams. The first is the addition of a catalyst.
When you’re of f-task, not only does the power reroute to your genius
lounge, but your hippocampus, your memory-maker , starts to build
memories out of all the new things you’ve learned. Your hippocampus has
an odd quirk: as it forms the new memories it takes pieces of them, shards
of information, and tosses them into your genius lounge. This is why it is
important to keep gathering new information. These new bits of information
act as catalysts for your genius lounge.
So it can be a good idea to add a catalyst to your genius council crew .
Putting It into Practice: Catalysts for Your Genius Lounge
Adding a new and/or random person
Moving to or working in a new location

--- PAGE 103 ---
Setting a ridiculous goal for an hour , like collecting all the orange Post-it pads in the
office
Reading a page or two from a book
Watching a scene from a movie, or the whole movie
Sharing specific stories (your worst vacation, your best day of school)
Researching the history of anything—a building, a movement, a country , cave art
The other thing you can do to biomimic the brain’ s system is deputize
someone, probably the leader already , but deputize them still to play the
role of the EN. Here’ s what that entails:
You nominate the person.
Everyone agrees.
The EN announces the problem, focusing the team, even if everyone
knows what the issue is.
The EN steps back and lets the team begin.
The EN steps in to point out a particularly intriguing idea or suggest a
direction, then steps back again.
This dance continues. The deputized EN acts as a guide for the genius
council and makes sure you don’ t go down too many rabbit holes.
Critique Your Breakthr ough
Tom Chi is a legendary innovator in Silicon Valley . This is how he runs a
brainstorming session. We found his set of rules ideally suited for testing
out your breakthrough with your trusted crew . It also is structured enough to
allow you to invite others into the process.
1. Start by having everyone state the things that work about the
breakthrough. Write those on a board. Pick a goal, say fifteen
things that work.

--- PAGE 104 ---
2. Don’ t write them in a list. Write them all over the board. No
list, no prioritizing, no top, and no bottom.
3. Draw a picture beside the idea. Pictures turn on a dif ferent part
of the brain, the nonverbal part.
As Chi told us, “Y ou are taking something that is usually linear or
sequential and verbal and making it something nonlinear , parallel and
visual.”3
This next part is important.
4. Tell everyone to do their best not to judge anything. Try to stay
open minded. Do not voice opinions. Try not to let your ego
become attached to any of the ideas on the board.
Chi suggests you spend thirty minutes to reach your goal of fifteen
things that are working. And then you need to create a transitional moment.
5. Take two minutes of silence. Tell everyone to look at the board,
take it all in, and let things start to connect.
The silence and the looking at the board are a way to use the EN to
direct the DN’ s genius lounge to start connecting things, and to give it space
to do so. You are creating a ritual to slide everyone into their associative
state.
6. Have people draw the connections they see among the things
that are working. Have them up at the board drawing lines. You
want people to see the connections. Use dif ferent colored
markers for the dif ferent connections. (The board starts to look
like a spider web. That’ s okay . It will slow down naturally .)
7. Ask people to tell little stories about the connections they see,
saying how these things are connected. The stories encourage
people to build on one another .

--- PAGE 105 ---
8. Clusters will begin to emer ge, groups of connected ideas. Once
you have six, eight, ten clusters, ask people how they feel about
them. Ask them to rate the clusters on a scale of 1 to 10.
9. Only look at clusters that rank at 7 or above.
This process allows you and your trusted crew to go through your
breakthrough and see all the possibilities in it, or see that it just doesn’ t
work. Or see that parts of it work but parts are missing or need more
thought.
Build a Constraint Box
Thomas Edison did not invent the lightbulb. The first patent for a lightbulb
was taken out in England in 1841. But Edison did create the first
commer cially viable  lightbulb forty years later . And he didn’ t do it alone.
Francis Robbins Upton was a Princeton graduate who was suggested to
Edison by the German scientist Hermann von Helmholtz. The self-taught
Edison was suspicious of university types but he hired Upton and set him to
work on the lightbulb.
In order to find the right material to be a filament Upton built a
constraint box. One constraint was that the filament have a high resistance.
This meant it wouldn’ t take a lot of ener gy. The second constraint was that
the filament glowed at a low heat. This meant it would be useful at a low
energy point. The third constraint was that it give of f enough light. The
fourth constraint was that the filament last long enough to make the
lightbulb economically sensible.
Once he had built the constraint box, Upton and his team made an
exhaustive list of all the materials that met these criteria. They then tried
each one until they reached carbonized bamboo, a filament that lasted for
1,200 hours.
While Upton used his constraint box to find his breakthrough, they can
also be helpful to evaluate the output of your genius mode. Judah gave this
tool to a team of researchers at Genentech. They were complaining about
how dif ficult it is to work with federal regulations, so Judah had them lay

--- PAGE 106 ---
out all the regulations they had to deal with. He used the regulations to
build a constraint box. They formed the walls of the box.
The constraint box clearly defined the space the researchers could work
in. It also focused their ener gy, so that they accepted the regulations rather
than banged their heads against them, and used them to define the scope of
their work.
Then Judah asked the researchers to share all their assumptions and he
wrote them all down. Then he called them out one at a time and asked the
whole group, “Is this true?” Doing it out loud as a group led to a number of
assumptions being challenged and then taken away . The ener gy in the room
increased as the team started to feel more confident.
Although drug research is a long and complex path, the team is still
using the constraint box and assumption challenge today .
It can help to make this whole process visual by drawing it.
Think of all the constraints that stand between you and the
breakthrough you seek. Let’ s say there are eight constraints.
Draw a big cube. Make sure it has a big, empty center .
Draw eight squares around the edge of the cube.
Write one of the constraints inside each of the squares.
You now have a constraint box and that big, empty center is your
solution space. It is important to make the center big and empty so that you
see it as a space of opportunity rather than confinement.
You can do one of two things with the box. You can take your
breakthrough and see if it fits inside the constraints, or you can use it to set
the conditions and then go and let your mind wander .
Now , outside of that box, on the edges of the paper , start to write down
all your assumptions. Write everything you assume about your constraints
and about the breakthrough you need. By writing them down, you see them
and get to ask yourself if your assumptions are true. You get to test and push
on them. If one of them is wrong and you get to remove a constraint, you
suddenly have an opening in your constraint box. That opening is a space
for a breakthrough to sneak in.

--- PAGE 107 ---
But more important, the constraint box sets the stage for your DN to
create a breakthrough. It sets parameters around your problem and then, by
laying out the assumptions, of fers places for your DN to test out possible
breakthroughs.
Try It
In order to see if it is a breakthrough, try it, play it out. Too often we sit
with our breakthroughs and do not put them out into the world to field-test
them. Go ahead. Test them. Do them. Take action. That’ s why there’ s mode
switching. The breakthrough is not a breakthrough if you’ve just thought of
it in your DN. You have to do something with it, put it into the world with
your EN. If you’ve caught a butterfly , you need to make sure it can fly .
KEY  TAKEA WAYS
Once you’ve finished your research, gathered your data, and
discovered new ideas, it’ s time to evaluate.
Edward de Bono’ s Six Thinking Hats is a good tool for this analysis.
We highly recommend his book Six Thinking Hats.
Feedback from others about your ideas is critical. They will provide
you with new insights, as well as identify your potential blind spots.
Build a crew . Surround yourself with other people who can assist
you. They will give you feedback, supplement your knowledge,
make critical connections for you, and even help you execute your
breakthroughs.
Biomimic your brain by mapping your team members to the brain
regions that create breakthroughs. Remember to add a catalyst and
deputize someone to play the role of the EN.
Use Tom Chi’ s critique method of brainstorming in a more open
way. Get as many ideas up on the board as you can, find the
connections, invite quiet, create narratives, create clusters of ideas
and rank them.
Create a constraint box by writing out all your constraints in the
form of a box. The big, open center of the box will define your
breakthrough space.

--- PAGE 108 ---
Put your idea into the world and see what happens.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 109 ---
Part Two
The Blockers
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 110 ---
Chapter 7
                  
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 111 ---
The Spiders of Fear
A Powerful Butterfly Repellent
HAVE YOU EVER felt a rush when imagining vivid negative scenarios? Let’ s
say you’re walking down the street and you feel your phone buzz in your
pocket. You pull it out and see you have a text from your boss or colleague
saying: Please stop by my desk when you get back from lunch. We need to clean up your
presentation for next week . You feel a wave of dread start in your gut and move
through your whole body . You grow cold and hot at the same time.
Oh my god,  you think, I totally scr ewed up the pr esentation. I knew I
hadn’ t gotten it right . As you walk to the of fice, you look back over the past
week to find all the signs that you had indeed failed. There was that look
your coworker Josh gave you at lunch. And that comment Amy made about
needing to burn the midnight oil. That was directed at you, you now realize,
because the presentation was missing the mark. Now you’ve gotten yourself
to a place where not only is your presentation no good, but everyone else
knows it.
I’m going to be fir ed. It’ s going to be impossible to find another job in
this city . I’m going to have to move, take the kids out of school. Sell the
house in a down market and lose my shirt.
This train of negative fantasies is called catastrophizing: interpreting
mundane events as major threats. The fear it creates is one of the greatest
inhibitors of our breakthrough butterflies.
Part of why we catastrophize is to emotionally prepare ourselves for the
worst. You weren’ t being crazy; all the above scenarios could have
happened—it’ s not as if you were worried about aliens coming to Earth.
Everything you described has indeed happened to other people and could
happen to you. But there was no foundation for them: all the things you
imagined after reading the text message were pure conjecture, directed
toward catastrophe not from real evidence, but rather from your emotional
reaction.

--- PAGE 112 ---
This reaction may have served you in the past to prepare you for
terrible things. And there is a part of you that enjoys catastrophizing: there’ s
a rush of adrenaline and other neurochemicals as the fight-or -flight response
kicks in. And paradoxically , catastrophizing can make you feel safer: At
least I won’ t be caught off-guar d. At least I can pr epare.
We have a deep-rooted instinct to envision the worst because this
tendency has, in the past, kept us alive. Mother Nature “wants” us to
catastrophize because although a happy outlook might have led to a happier
life, it also likely led to a much shorter one. The nervous system, which
ensures our survival, was developed from jellyfish onward to figure out,
essentially , “Can I eat this, or is it going to eat me?”
Now , if you miss out on eating something that’ s not a big deal; there
will be other things to eat. However , if you miss the signal that this is
something that will eat you, well, that’ s a problem of existential
proportions. Those human beings who did not panic at the sound of a twig
snapping? They weren’ t our ancestors—they were dinner . And so we
evolved to have a bias toward negative information, a strange attraction to
catastrophizing, in a manner similar to our predilection for fat and sugar .
But just like fat or sugar , while catastrophizing may once have been
useful, now it just serves to shut down our brain.1 Worse yet, because of
neuroplasticity , the more you use those negative mental pathways, the
deeper the groove gets, thus the easier it becomes to fall into it in the future.
Welcome to the negativity bias: the tendency to give far more attention to
negative details than positive ones.
In addition to the negativity bias, we also have a confirmation bias,
which is our tendency to selectively retain information that confirms our
preexisting notions. Unfortunately , with a negative bias in place, we tend to
reconfirm our negative expectations.
Negative things produce more neural activity than equally intense
positive things. We are quicker to recognize the negative in our world. We
recognize angry faces more quickly and easily than happy faces. We even
learn faster from pain than pleasure.
The amygdala, the fire alarm of your brain, uses two thirds of its
neurons to look for the negative. These negative things get stored into
memory almost immediately , a library of things to watch out for . Positive

--- PAGE 113 ---
things need to be held in awareness for twelve seconds to transfer to longer -
term memory . (This is why gratitude, meditation, and loving-kindness are
necessary: we need to focus on the good for our brain to be able to truly
remember it.) As Rick Hanson puts it, your “brain is like Velcro for
negative experiences but Teflon for positive ones.”2
From our survival instinct’ s perspective, failure can lead directly to
death: misjudge the speed of the saber -toothed tiger and you die. Miss the
crack of a branch announcing a falling tree and you die.
Failure can also indirectly lead to death via loss of status: there’ s a
reason we have the expression “the lion’ s share of the meat.” The lower on
the totem pole, the fewer resources the individual receives, and someone
who falls so low he or she is outcast from the tribe would certainly die.
Both our own instincts and conventional wisdom seem to give us these two
messages:
1. Failure is bad. If you’re failing, you’re doing something wrong.
If you do something wrong, you should be punished.
Punishment is shameful, so you must avoid failure at all costs.
Failure is shameful, and if you fail, you are a loser and the
group will shun you.
2. Failure is avoidable. If you’re failing, you’re doing something
wrong. You should be able to avoid failure by doing everything
right.
What we’ll see in the following chapters is that both the fear of failure
and the experience of failure are unavoidable. So you need to get good at
handling them, especially because they can block the breakthrough process.
This chapter covers fear of failure; the next chapter will teach you how to
handle the actual experience  of failure itself.
The goal of this chapter is to understand why we have this fear of
failure—where it comes from—and what to do about it. You’ll see how the
fear of failure af fects both our minds and our bodies. You’ll learn about the
most common manifestations of the fear of failure: the impostor syndrome,

--- PAGE 114 ---
the inner critic, and the perfectionist. And you’ll learn how to handle them
so they no longer block your breakthroughs.
It’s Unavoidable
Fear is an unavoidable part of the breakthrough process, whether you’re
seeking an intentional breakthrough or experiencing an unintentional
breakthrough. The only dif ference is when  fear shows up, and what this fear
is directed toward.
For intentional breakthroughs, it shows up before the breakthrough. You
want the breakthrough because you think the consequences will be good. So
you don’ t fear the consequences of implementation as much (though things
certainly could go wrong in the implementation phase). What you fear are
the consequences of the quest itself. What if you fail to achieve the
breakthrough you are seeking? What if it turns out you’ve wasted time,
money , and ef fort “for nothing”?
The thing is, we have  to accept the possibility of failure and deal with
that fear . Intentional breakthroughs such as business or science innovation
breakthroughs require the willingness to fail, to accept that what you’re
trying to achieve may not work out. If you’re not willing to fail, you’ll only
do things guaranteed to succeed. Guaranteed success can only occur with
things that have been done before, and therefore, by definition, aren’ t
innovative. If you’re not willing to risk failure, you won’ t innovate.
Most successful innovation breakthroughs were the result of countless
iterations—which means countless consecutive failures. Or as Adam
Berman, executive director of the University of California, Berkeley Haas
School of Business Institute for Business Innovation puts it: “Innovation is
evolutionary rather than revolutionary .”3
For intentional breakthroughs, the fear you experience is the fear of not
reaching that breakthrough. This fear of failure can prevent you from
attempting all the things you’ll need to do to succeed.
For unintentional breakthroughs, the fear comes after the breakthrough,
but is just as toxic as it is for intentional breakthroughs. Unintentional
breakthroughs aren’ t always welcome, and are often good in the long term

--- PAGE 115 ---
but highly unpleasant in the short term—such as the sudden realization that
“Oh! I need a divorce.”
The unintentional breakthrough may seem to come out of the blue. It’ s
actually , as we’ve seen, the result of a lengthy process, just not a conscious
one. In this case, there was no need for you to deliberately “attempt”
anything or “try things out” as you must for an intentional breakthrough. So
you won’ t experience the fear of not getting to the breakthrough. You might
be experimenting on your way to the breakthrough, but you won’ t be aware
you’re doing so.
We may worry: “What if this breakthrough turns out to be wrong? What
if I rely on it and then end up looking like an idiot? Even if it’ s right, what
will be the consequences of following it? Or what if I have the
breakthrough and it’ s a legitimate breakthrough but I’m so broken I can’ t
change? If I try to have a personal breakthrough and I fail, does that mean
that I am stuck like this forever?” And so forth.
Whereas intentional breakthroughs raise the fear of not attaining a
breakthrough, unintentional breakthroughs raise the fear of implementing a
breakthrough.
Whether before or after a breakthrough, you will encounter fear: it’ s an
integral part of the path. So you might as well learn how to overcome it,
because otherwise, it could paralyze you. For intentional breakthroughs,
fear could prevent you from attempting a breakthrough, thus preventing you
from achieving one. For unintentional breakthroughs, it could prevent you
from implementing your breakthrough, thus rendering it useless.
It’s a Real Br eakthr ough Blocker
Have you ever cried during a sad movie? Consciously , you know it’ s just a
movie. You realize those are actors who are delighted to pretend they’re
dying heroically in exchange for a nice paycheck. Yet your brain sees what
is happening on the screen and your tear ducts start flooding whether you
like it or not. There’ s a reason they’re called “tearjerkers.”
In fact, you don’ t even need a movie screen to experience this ef fect:
you can do it yourself. Close your eyes. (W ell, close them after reading
this.)

--- PAGE 116 ---
Imagine standing on a beach where the sand is too hot for comfort.
Imagine digging your feet down to the cooler sand beneath. Feel the
relief.
Imagine being handed a mar garita, taking the slice of lemon of f the top,
and biting into it. Feel the sour taste on your tongue. Do you feel your
taste buds salivating in response?
Now imagine you’re in a classroom. Imagine you’re at the chalkboard,
dragging your fingernails across it.
Sorry we made you cringe. There was no chalkboard, there was no
lemon, and unless you’re reading this on a beach, there was no sand either .
And yet your mind produced very real physical reactions in response to
completely imaginary events.
So what happens when you’re feeling anxious about an upcoming
performance review? You’re focusing on everything you think could go
wrong—and all of a sudden, your palms get sweaty and your pulse starts
racing. Why? You’re not in the performance review , after all! But because
our brain doesn’ t distinguish between imagination and reality very well,
when you imagine something, it will often send real, physical commands,
as if the situation were real.4
When you imagine failing, these imaginary scenarios have the capacity
to generate a real neural response, the activation of the threat response.5
Even if the failure hasn’ t actually happened, the simple fear of failure can
generate the fight-or -flight response.
The ef fects of this automatic response are well known. When a zebra is
chased by a lion, stress hormones cause its body to increase heart rate and
oxygenation, and shunt resources away from momentarily superfluous
functions such as digestion, which is why a zebra chased by a lion
immediately “lightens his load” while running away .6
In the same way , when stressed, the human body shoots stress
hormones such as adrenaline and cortisol through our veins and directs all
its resources toward crucial fighting or fleeing functions: elevated heart and
breathing rates, muscle reaction, acuity of vision and hearing, and so forth.

--- PAGE 117 ---
As Dr . Esther Sternber g, author of several books on the physiology of
stress, explains, “The physiological stress response is actually designed to
be an asset. It speeds the heart rate and diverts blood away from the gut and
to the muscles so we can run away . It constricts the pupils of our eyes so we
can focus on our attacker . It dilates the bronchi of the lungs to increase
blood oxygenation, and converts ener gy stored in the liver into fuel for
strength and stamina.”7 It’s designed to help us survive.
Your body stops worrying about living ten more years, and instead
reacts to survive ten more minutes. “Nonur gent” functions such as muscle
repair , digestion, and the immune system shut down for you, just as they do
for the zebra. And your “superfluous” functions—such as cognitive
reasoning—also shut down. In other words, because it’ s not critical to
survival, rational thinking gets shut down when the fight-or -flight response
is activated. *
The physiological stress response was designed for short bursts. It
evolved to put us in a powerful state in which most of our resources are
narrowly focused on survival for a very short time. We were never supposed
to stay in such a heightened state for very long.
If a zebra chased by a big cat on the African savannah manages to
escape, it eventually slows down, stops, sits down, and then starts to shake
intensely . We might interpret this as fear . In fact, the shaking helps the zebra
release itself from the hold of its stress hormones, because it instinctively
knows it is safe. When the zebra stands up again, it has returned to its
earlier relaxed physiological state, with no residual stress in its body .
The reason the fight-or -flight system is so powerful is because it is built
with direct neuron-to-neuron contact. This means that the neurons
communicate electrically  with one another , skipping the slower process of
neurochemicals crossing the synaptic gap. Basically , your rational functions
send instructions via horse-drawn carriage while your fight-or -flight system
uses FedEx.
Negativity exists to make you act, to either fix the problem or get out of
the situation. We evolved feelings like fear or anxiety partially to get us to
do something .
There are times when the discomfort of intense fear is highly
appropriate. If you’re in life-threatening danger , then you want your body

--- PAGE 118 ---
pooling all of its resources to ensure your immediate survival. However , in
the civilized, modern world, few situations call for a full fight-or -flight
response. In other cases, our instinctive reactions actually work against us.
How Fear  Affects Your Mind
Think about a time you’ve become paralyzed in the middle of an exam, or
even worse, on stage. You’re like a deer in the headlights, frozen, heart
racing, palms sweaty . You’re trying to remember what you’re supposed to
do, but your mind is blank. Your higher cognitive functions have ceased
operations.
Heightened stress triggers the mind to declare a state of emer gency . In
response your mind turns of f what it deems to be unnecessary functions.
Unfortunately , that means the body is reducing our cognitive abilities just
when we may need them most. It’ s hard to remember this in the midst of an
anxiety attack, but rest assured that this reaction is an entirely normal one
intended for your well-being.
Philippe Goldin, director of Stanford’ s Clinically Applied Affective
Neuroscience lab, told us: “The threat response can hijack attention; making
us revert to very simplistic mental algorithms and habitual, automatic
solutions.”8 David Rock, founder of the NeuroLeadership Institute,
explains: “The threat response impairs analytic thinking, creative insight,
and problem solving.”9
The kinds of fear we are talking about here manifest as social inhibition
in the form of the impostor syndrome and the inner critic, and as
perfectionism and its close cousin, maximizing.
Social inhibition is, essentially , the fear of “what others would think.”
This fear of looking stupid or being judged are the flip side of our social
awareness. Social inhibition is absolutely useful; it’ s the part of us that
makes us “civilized,” but it has its drawbacks. Insights can only happen in
the wake of quieting your frontal lobes, and that is where your inhibitions
live.
The problem with these inhibitions is that they can lead us to repress
thoughts and ideas that could lead to great breakthroughs. In some cases,
diminished social inhibition caused by the degeneration of the prefrontal

--- PAGE 119 ---
lobes led people to a fountain of creativity—painting, art, and so forth.
People who’d never had an artistic bone in their body suddenly became
prolific artists.10
Social inhibition is likely the single biggest blocker you will encounter
on your road to achieving or implementing breakthroughs. Does this mean
you should voluntarily damage your frontal lobes? Of course not. You
might have heard of the case of Phineas Gage, whose frontal lobes were
damaged by a railroad accident in 1848. In the aftermath of the accident, he
became “fitful, irreverent, indulging at times in the grossest profanity
(which was not previously his custom).”11 The man was “gross, profane,
coarse, and vulgar , to such a degree that his society was intolerable.”12 We
need our frontal lobes to function in society .
But it’ s certainly true that finding ways to put the frontal lobes “to
sleep” is an age-old search for creatives. The saying “W rite drunk, edit
sober” captures it perfectly , and embodies the whole process of
breakthrough thinking.
Write drunk: Drinking quiets the frontal lobes, the social-inhibition part
of our brain, the monitor . You quiet the EN and you let the DN run wild to
generate a burst of breakthrough thinking.
Edit sober: Then you bring the EN back online to sift, evaluate, and
prioritize. This is the phase of conver gent thinking, critical thinking.
Social inhibition shows up in our brains in the prefrontal cortex, and in
our minds as the impostor syndrome and the inner critic.
The Impostor  Syndr ome
The impostor syndrome is experienced when successful and competent
people believe they don’ t know as much as they should and live in constant
fear of being exposed as a fraud. It is that deep certainty that most of us feel
at some time in our life, that we ar e just not good enough.
Since the impostor syndrome was first identified, research has indicated
that more than 70 percent of the population has had this feeling at one time
or another .13
The impostor syndrome is also an obstacle to breakthrough thinking. If
you believe that you don’ t really know what you are doing and spend

--- PAGE 120 ---
mental ener gy fearing others will find you out, how can you possibly
believe you will see something no one else has seen before? Can you
imagine Thomas Edison thinking to himself, I’m no inventor , or Steve Jobs
plagued by thoughts like, Who am I to design computers?
And yet, counterintuitive as it may seem, the impostor syndrome is
most prevalent among high performers. When we speak about it at Harvard,
Yale, Stanford, or MIT , the room goes so silent that one could hear a pin
drop. When students discover this feeling has a name, and they aren’ t alone
in experiencing it, we see them exhale in relief. Michael Uslan still gets that
feeling occasionally when he’ s in the studio. “I still have this background
feeling that one of the security guards might come in and throw me out,” he
told us.
The impostor syndrome can be a great motivating tool, getting us to
work harder than anyone else. But at what cost? First, part of your brain is
always occupied with it—ar guing with it, trying to push it back, hiding
away from it. Second, if there are not “enough” successes according to
whatever arbitrary measure your brain has decided on, it activates the
sympathetic nervous system and deactivates your creative capacities. Third,
worst of all, it can prevent you from taking the risks you need to take to
reach breakthrough innovation.
Today we finally have ef fective tools to handle the impostor syndrome.
But just knowing the universality of such feelings can help us neutralize
their ef fect and reduce their power . By reading this section, you’ve already
taken the first step.
The basis of the impostor syndrome is having the impression of
yourself as not competent for this job, this activity , this position—in our
case, as not capable of creating breakthroughs.
This image, this impression of yourself, is technically known as a self-
image . A self-image, in plain terms, is who we think we are: our personality ,
our capabilities, etc.14
Once people have developed an image of themselves, there is a strong
tendency for that image to be maintained by a bias in what they pay
attention to, what they remember , and what they are prepared to accept as
true about themselves. In other words, the self-image becomes self-
perpetuating.

--- PAGE 121 ---
The most ef fective way to handle (or even dismantle) the impostor
syndrome is to change your self-image.
Before going any further , here are two shortcuts you can try to change
the playing field so that the impostor syndrome simply no longer applies.
Shortcut #1: Change the Label
Try simply changing the name of what you aspire to be, and see if there is another term that fits
more easily with your current self-image. Olivia, for example, doesn’ t consider herself to be
creative. Resourceful, yes. Ingenious, yes. Those words feel comfortable. But she’ s not
comfortable calling herself “creative,” because creativity is not in her self-image. To her ,
“creative” belongs to those other people who have a design sensibility , to artists, to people who do
creative things (like music, art, and theater). Creativity feels intangible, elusive, something she
can’t see the contours of. But with the self-image of someone who is “ingenious and resourceful,”
she achieves the same creativity .
Shortcut #2: Flip the Scenario
Ask yourself which elements of your experience (or lack thereof), personality , or background does
the impostor syndrome use to make you feel like a fraud. Take each of these in turn, and flip them
around:
“I’m too young for this job” becomes “My youth is a huge advantage because . . .” Do you
have a better grasp of new technology? A better understanding of the customer base? A greater
willingness to take risks, to try new things?
“I’ve never worked in this industry before. I’m not an industry expert” becomes “The fact that
I’m not an industry expert is a huge advantage because they already have industry experts falling
from the rafters. They don’ t need one more. What I can bring is a wealth of new perspectives and
different experiences, and I can bring everything I’ve learned outside this industry to bear on the
problems we’re facing here.” And so forth . . .
“At Microsoft,” explains Kevin Sauer , “the imposter syndrome has
taken on a life of its own. One of our most famous technologists wrote a
blog about being a phony and it is referenced all the time internally .15 It is
almost so ‘hip’  to be a phony that it isn’ t.”
Three of the brain’ s limitations will come in handy to change a self-
image that’ s holding you back. The brain doesn’ t have a great sense of:

--- PAGE 122 ---
Scale: A series of little things can be just as dif ficult to handle as
one big thing. Our brain isn’ t naturally adept at prioritizing, and
for once you can make it work in your favor . This is the science
of “small wins.” Dr . Teresa Amabile, professor and director of
research at Harvard Business School, to whom we owe so many
discoveries in the field of individual and team creativity and
productivity , organizational innovation, and the psychology of
everyday work life, found that even small wins could have a
tremendous impact on people’ s inner state. “Many of the
progress events our research participants reported represented
only minor steps forward. Yet they often evoked outsize positive
reactions.”16
Time: A vivid event that happened thirty years ago can feel “as if
it were yesterday .” It’s the vividness and ease of recall that
matter here, rather than how recently the event occurred.
The dif ference between imagination and reality , as we’ve
mentioned earlier .17
Now we will show you how you can use each of these limitations in
your favor , to change your self-image step-by-step.
Step 1: Define Your Goal
What new self-image do you want? Meditation teacher Tara Brach, author
of the wonderful Radical Acceptance,  asks, “Who would you be if you
didn’ t believe you were fundamentally flawed?”18 What self-image do you
need to achieve your goal? Maybe you want to see yourself as a risk-taker .
Perhaps you’d like to see yourself as creative.
Step 2: Gather Past Evidence
Look back into your past and find at least five acts of creativity , five ways
you’ve been creative. These could be big acts of creativity (that time when I
found a solution for the whole project) or small ones (I found a way to get
around the traf fic jam this morning). It’ s quantity rather than quality that

--- PAGE 123 ---
matters here. Remember you can also try replacing “creative” with
“resourceful” or “ingenious.”
Step 3: Put the Evidence on Display
Ellen Langer of Harvard University and her colleagues enlisted the help of
two groups of elderly men in 1981.19 The men, who were in their seventies
and eighties, were sequestered far away from the world in a monastery in
New Hampshire. When each group arrived at the monastery they
encountered a world with the clock turned back. They were surrounded by
things from the 1950s, a black-and-white television, an old-time radio, even
copies of the Satur day Evening Post.  They listened to a radio broadcast of
the 1959 Preakness Stakes. They watched the 1959 movie Anatomy of a
Murder. They even talked about the political issues of that era, such as the
space race or Nikita Khrushchev .
Both groups stayed for one week, though not at the same time. There
was only one dif ference between the two groups of men. The first group
were told to pretend they were once again young men. The second group
were told to simply reminisce about being young men.
Prior to and following the experiment, both groups of men underwent
extensive cognitive and physical tests. After one week in the monastery
both groups showed improvement in strength, hearing, vision, posture, and
even flexibility , their fingers more agile and less curled by arthritis. They
scored better on intelligence tests too. But the group of men who actually
pretended they were young men showed significantly more improvement
than the group that only reminisced. Their bodies actually seemed younger .
“Wherever you put the mind, the body will follow ,” Langer concluded.
By the end of the monastery study Langer was playing touch football with
these men. The canes they had used to walk now lay at the side of the field.
“It is not primarily our physical selves that limit us,” she explains, “but
rather our mindset about our physical limits.”
In order for this technique to be ef fective, you need to truly surround
yourself with the evidence of a new self-image. In addition to these lists of
past creative acts, you can also post photos around the room of you doing
creative or crazy stuf f—anything that shows you being socially
disinhibited!

--- PAGE 124 ---
Step 4: Embrace Your New Self-Image
Though many of us assume that our behaviors flow from our beliefs and
attitudes, in social psychology it is understood that most often our behaviors
are what change and form our attitudes, not vice versa. This cognitive
dissonance theory suggests that our behaviors have a stronger influence on
our attitudes than our attitudes on our behaviors.
“The way that people change their self-image is to act,” Robert
Cialdini, preeminent psychologist and author of the landmark book
Influence: The Psychology of Persuasion, told us.20 “One strategy is to
undertake a systematic program of action that fits with the self-image they
aspire to.”
If you start behaving in creative ways, even if the new behaviors don’ t
feel natural at first, your attitudes and beliefs will follow in order to reduce
your internal cognitive dissonance (“Gee, I must be creative after all”). This
is a more ef fective way to change our self-image than self–pep talk (“I am
creative, and can do something creative”).
The Science of Small Wins
Remember , research has shown that small wins have enormous power , and
as Charles Duhigg describes it, “an influence disproportionate to the
accomplishments of the victories themselves.”21 Small wins fuel
transformative changes by convincing people that bigger achievements are
within their reach. And what that means for you is to start with small steps,
steps so small they seem ludicrously easy . That helps you build success
momentum.
Duhigg added, “‘Small wins are a steady application of a small
advantage,’  one Cornell professor wrote in 1984. ‘Once a small win has
been accomplished, forces are set in motion that favor another small win.’
Small wins fuel transformative changes by leveraging tiny advantages into
patterns that convince people that bigger achievements are within reach.”
B. J. Fogg, founder of the Stanford Persuasive Technology Lab, told us,
“For about six months, I’ve been obsessed with ‘success momentum,’  the
feeling you get when you succeed over and over . When you manage to

--- PAGE 125 ---
change small things in your life, you feel a growing sense of satisfaction
and control.”22
It seems our brains aren’ t very good at distinguishing big successes
from small successes. Your successes don’ t need to be big things, like
cleaning your entire home. Just wiping out the bathroom sink, he explained,
can help create success momentum if—and this is key—you feel you
succeeded.
As Fogg explained, small successes are easier to get than big ones, so
you can stack up many small successes within a few minutes. And you can
have dozens during any given morning. Small successes (not big ones) are
the fastest, simplest way to build success momentum.
When Fogg knows he’ s going to have a hard day , he told us that he
“does a series of small wins to build momentum, increase confidence and
resiliency .” He especially favors tidying the house. It’ s also useful to
combat procrastination: when B. J. finds himself procrastinating, he gives
himself a window during which he can do “small win” activities.
Here’ s how small wins can help create a new self-image: If you have
lost touch with your inner creative genius, start with tiny creative acts, such
as making up nicknames for your plants or daily objects—Philip the
photocopier , for instance. Then start to invent a backstory for each of them.
Philip is from Minnesota, loves football (Go Blue!), and so on.
Accumulating a lot of small wins can bulk up to a big win and a new self-
image.
Putting It into Practice: Changing Your Self-image
Define your goal. What self-image do you want?
Gather past evidence. Look into the past and write out five ways you’ve been creative.
Put the evidence on display . Pin them up on the wall or use a Post-it. Do this every
night for ten days. On the last evening, read all the items at once. See how you feel
about your self-image now .
Embrace your new self-image. Take advantage of the science of small wins and build
up many “small successes.”

--- PAGE 126 ---
The Inner  Critic
The inner critic is that nasty voice inside your head telling you that you
have done this and that wrong, or that you are a failure, or any other of the
infinite varieties on this theme our inner critics come up with. It is
especially dangerous since it is most apt to launch the sympathetic nervous
system, and so prevent us from even attempting anything.
A good way to know whether the inner critic is operating within you is
to pay attention to how often you hear the word “should” in your own mind.
You should have left earlier , or perhaps, You should be exercising daily . The
inner critic causes you to, as they say , “should all over yourself.”
Since internal attacks are perceived by our mind in ways very similar to
those a real, physical attack would be perceived, they can generate the
automatic physical reaction we met in the previous section, the threat or
fight-or -flight response.
Professional basketball and football players often trash-talk to cause an
opposing player to doubt his own abilities. Michael Jordan was famous for
this. Unfortunately many of us trash-talk ourselves. We self-criticize, doubt
our own abilities, and turn on our threat response. This can have a negative
effect on our ability to perform.
As Dr . Philippe Goldin put it, “When people call in sick, their lack of
productivity is obvious. But a more insidious hindrance to productivity
happens when people are consumed by negative thoughts throughout the
day. Internal self-criticism can severely limit innovation and creativity .”23
Though people may be physically present, they’re really locked in a duel
with their inner critic, unable to move forward. And because that mental
absenteeism isn’ t visible, it can go unaddressed.
Self-criticism is one of the most common obstacles to great
performance in any field. We have come to consider self-criticism and self-
doubt the “silent killers” of business. So many executives suf fer from it, yet
so few dare speak out about it.
Over the years, we have heard everyone from junior associates to the
most senior executives confess that much of their workday is spent in battle
with negativity , an army of inner critics pointing out disappointments,
forecasting failure, beating the drum of despair . In some cases, they (and

--- PAGE 127 ---
we) were amazed they accomplished anything at all. One executive told us
a full 80 percent of his day was spent fighting his inner critic.
The Inner  Critic and Body Language
This kind of negativity doesn’ t just af fect our actual performance, it also af fects how others
perceive us.
Let’s say you’re in a conversation. You say something, then immediately think, Oh, that
was a stupid thing to say . What’ s going to happen to your face? You may wince at the
thought and your expression may tense. Because we can’ t control our body language, any
negativity in our mind will eventually manifest on our face.
No matter how brief that negative expression, the person facing you is going to spot it.
And all they know is that while you were looking at them and listening to them, a negative
expression crossed your face. Naturally they’ll assume that expression was a reaction to
them—what they said or did, or what you think about them. This is how internal negativity
affects your body language and your performance.
People know their self-doubt and self-criticism doesn’ t help them, yet
they can’ t let it go. Recognizing and acknowledging its purpose (“My body
is responding because it’ s trying to keep me safe”) or finding self-
compassion (“Of course I’m reacting this way—this is scary”) can help
break the cycle.
Here’ s how the inner critic can hinder your breakthroughs. Let’ s say
you’re considering trying a new way of running meetings.
Your brain, with its ingrained negative bias, starts to imagine the
possible failures. Immediately , you imagine others’  reactions to your failure.
Feelings of shame and fear rise up. You want to shut down, run away , hide,
and certainly not try this experiment in real life.
But what actually happened here? The experience is in fact our own
internal discomfort created by our inner critic’ s verdict on others’  judgment.
The good news is that everything we’ve just described happens entirely
inside our heads. Let’ s see how to change this internal experience.
Knowing how to handle the inner critic is essential to unleashing your
breakthrough potential. Unfortunately , our first reflex when under attack is
to try to ar gue with the inner critic. And this is where practices like
cognitive behavioral therapy , excellent in getting us to detach from thoughts
and get some perspective, can get us into trouble.

--- PAGE 128 ---
Trying to suppress the thought would make things worse. But you can
learn to dance  with your shadow; you can learn to handle  your inner critic.
With practice, by using techniques such as the ones you’ll learn here, you
can achieve some distance from internal negativity , and maybe even get to a
place where the inner critic’ s voice evokes in you only a smile or a chuckle.
We promise.
Find Your “Everybody”
Dr. Martha Beck, who says that she has become extremely intimate with her
inner critic through three Harvard degrees (including a PhD in sociology),
explains that “everybody’ s Everybody is composed of just a few key
people. Our social nature makes us long to fit in with a lar ger group, but it’ s
difficult to hold the tastes and opinions of more than five or six individuals
in your mind. So the resourceful social self creates a kind of shorthand: it
picks up a few people’ s attitudes, emblazons them on your brain, and
extrapolates this image until it covers the entire known universe. The vague
compilation of folks you call Everybody is what psychologists term ‘the
generalized other .’”24
The tool that Beck recommends to detach from this limiting
“everybody” in your mind is the most ef fective we’ve seen. Here’ s how it
works: find all the statements about creativity , innovation, and
breakthroughs that you would like to believe about yourself and that could
objectively be considered true.
For instance:
I have an amazingly capable brain. We guarantee that you do.
Your brain processes millions of bits of information every
second, without your even thinking about it.
I’m highly cr eative by natur e. Look around the room at the lists
you’ve put up on the walls. Think of the adventures you created
for your daily objects.
. . . and so forth.
For each of these statements, make two columns:

--- PAGE 129 ---
People who have told you that this
(or something like it) is truePeople who have told you this (or
something like it) is not true
I have an amazingly
capable brain.Mary , Jeff Sam, Fernando
I am highly creative. My first-grade teacher (Y es, this
counts.)
 . . . and so forth.
Fill in as many blanks as you can, and it’ s perfectly all right if the same
name comes up several times. The important thing is that you are not
allowed to generalize; you must use specific people.
Look over the columns of names you’ve written down, and answer the
following questions:
1. Whom do you like more? (People on the left or people on the
right?)
2. Whom do you respect more? (People on the left or people on
the right?)
3. Which people have the happier , more fulfilling lives? (People
on the left or people on the right?)
4. Which people have more stable, intimate relationships? (People
on the left or people on the right?)
5. If you had a baby and were forced to leave your child to be
raised by other people, whom would you choose? (People on
the left or people on right?)
6. Which individuals most deserve to have their opinions ignored,
belittled, and discounted? (People on the left or people on the
right?)
7. Why in the name of all that’ s holy would you give any cr edence
to the people on the right?
Create a New “Everybody”
Because of our innate deference to authority , that encouraging, positive
“everybody” is most powerful when composed of people you admire.25 You
could pick people who were tremendously successful after a long string of

--- PAGE 130 ---
failures, like Lincoln, or people who enjoyed tremendous success while
failing two times out of three, like Babe Ruth.26 You could, for example, put
up a photo of Babe Ruth on the wall with a caption that reads:
Failed 6 times out of 10.
Greatest player of all time.
Cheesy? Perhaps. Ef fective? Absolutely .
In fact, famous athletes are a great source of imperfection examples:
Michael Jordan had a 50 percent failure rate for free throws; and Pelé and
Diego Maradona, two of the greatest soccer players of all time, when
playing in World Cup games, had a failure rate of 95 per cent! That’ s right,
95 percent of the shots they took did not result in a goal.
If you prefer non-sports examples, Tom Hanks has been known to say
that of the hundred-plus movies he’ s made, “seven or eight were good, a
dozen more are decent, and the rest are godawful.”27 And this is one of
Hollywood’ s most successful actors.
If you prefer business authority figures, here’ s legendary inventor
James Dyson on using failure to drive success:28 “I made 5,127 prototypes
of my vacuum before I got it right. There were 5,126 failures. But I learned
from each one. That’ s how I came up with a solution.” Dyson spent fifteen
years creating 5,126 versions that failed before he made one that worked.
The payof f was a multibillion-dollar company and a personal net worth
estimated at $1.6 billion.
Steven is a very successful entrepreneur . He sold his first company when he was twenty-
two years old and his second when he was thirty-two. Both of them had revolved around
data storage. Deciding to embark on his third start-up, Steven decided to reach a little
further than he had before. He had always enjoyed drawing and wanted to meld his love of
art with his love of technology . He had seen a demonstration once where a man wearing
sensors on his fingers was able to draw on a specialized screen. The cool part was the man
was standing ten feet away from the screen. Steven was hooked.
But he had recently run into two roadblocks. The technology was proving dif ficult to
master and, more important, investors were not impressed with the potential. They just
didn’ t think people would pay for it. Steven had had such an easy time with his two
previous companies. Their financial upside was clear . They made products with a clear use
for businesses. He didn’ t have to do much selling. But now he was faced with serious

--- PAGE 131 ---
doubts about his product. And what was worse, he really believed in this one with all his
heart. He loved this product. He wanted to use it himself.
Clearly Steven needed help with his pitch, but before he could get near that part he
needed to regain his emotional momentum. He was feeling like he had failed and it took the
wind from his sails. He was beginning to lose hope.
Judah asked Steven to meet him in Emeryville, California, on the east side of San
Francisco Bay . He and Steven began to walk. As they did, Judah told him a story and timed
their walk very carefully in his mind. He talked about a young animator working at Disney
in the early 1980s. The young man had seen the movie Tron and became very excited about
the potential of computer animation in movies. He made a short animated film using a
computer and showed it to his boss at Disney . His boss asked how much it cost. The young
man was eager to tell him that it cost no more than traditional animation. His boss said he
wasn’ t interested. The only reason to use a computer was if it was cheaper . But the young
man wouldn’ t take no for an answer . So you know what his boss did? He fired him. The
young man was John Lasseter , cofounder of Pixar Animation Studios.
And as Judah finished the story he turned the corner and at the end of the block was the
brick-and-iron gateway to the Pixar Studios campus. There was no need to give a pep talk
or to say never give up. Steven was bouncing with excitement, realizing he was following
in excellent footsteps.
The Perfectionist
Perfectionism can show up as a background feeling that you’re never doing
enough, that you’re so far behind on everything, or that you’re not on top of
everything like you “should” be. The perfectionist makes you focus on all
you haven’ t done, on all the ways you fall short, rather than all the ways in
which you are doing well.
You think of all those books you “should” read, all these exercises you
“should” do, and so forth. It’ s a litany of “shoulds”—just like the inner
critic, the perfectionist causes you to “should all over yourself.” However ,
unlike the inner critic, the perfectionist tends to focus on the goals and
activities in which it thinks you’re falling short, rather than on your value as
a human being. It focuses on what you’re doing rather than who you are.
Perfectionism can be related to social inhibition, or it can be separate.
Some people seek perfection not because of what others would say , but for
its own sake. Some artists are perfectionists just for art’ s sake.
There are elements of control and hubris in perfectionism: no one will
ever read all the books. No one  will ever know all the information. And
even if someone could know all the information, they couldn’ t know what it

--- PAGE 132 ---
all means and how it all connects. Like it or not, we are limited in our
capacity .
As shame researcher Brené Brown explains in The Gifts of
Imperfection , perfectionism is addictive because when, as we go through
life, we invariably do experience shame or judgment for some reason or
other , we believe it’ s because we weren’ t perfect enough. And rather than
questioning the faulty logic of perfectionism, we try even harder .
Essentially , the self-blame lets us keep the aspiration of being perfect.
Perfectionistic thinking assumes that there is a perfect goal to be
reached. Perfectionism is marching toward that predetermined goal, with
only one acceptable outcome. That march does not allow the downtime that
the default network needs, nor does it allow the open-mindedness to see all
the new things on the periphery that will lead to a breakthrough.
Breakthrough thinking is recognizing that we’re actually on a journey ,
engaged in a process. You may end up creating or stumbling upon
something you didn’ t set out to. Keep reminding yourself that the journey is
not a straight line; very often you end up at a dif ferent goal than you started
toward, and that doesn’ t mean it’ s a failure.
Here are a few tools to handle your inner perfectionist. Though each
one might not vanquish the perfectionist on its own, they’ll definitely give
you some breathing space, and when all done together are quite powerful.
Remember that if it’ s rare, it’ s precious. Philatelists love
“flawed” stamps. In fact, most of the most valuable stamps in the
world are flawed. The Swedish Three Skilling Banco, Yellow
Color Error , 1855 (it was supposed to be blue green) most
recently sold for $2.3 million. The Post Of fice Mauritius,
1847 (“post of fice” was printed on the stamp instead of “post
paid”) went for $3.8 million. It’ s the flaw that makes them
unique, thus valuable, to the tune of several million dollars.
Whenever the perfectionist rears its ugly head, try reminding
yourself that whatever action you have taken, whatever
“mistake” was made, it is completely and forever unique. There
will never again be this sequence of events. This may help to
give you a dif ferent perspective on imperfections, because our

--- PAGE 133 ---
brain’ s automatic reaction is to assume that anything that’ s rare is
precious, and therefore to be treasured.29
Post photos of people you admire with an imperfection-
encouraging sentence below , a quote you make up. Yes, the first
time you type it and read it, it may feel ridiculous. But within
about a week, it will start to feel real. For example, try having an
authority figure encouraging you to “only reach 70 percent of
perfect. No more.”30
If you’ve figured out whom you got the perfection mandate
from, write a letter , from them to you, about the downsides of
perfectionism. This letter should also contain their apology for
telling you to be perfect and their encouragement for you to be
imperfect from now on. Definitely put up his or her photo
surrounded with quotes you create to this ef fect.
In the next chapter , you will get a failure blueprint, directions on “how
to fail right.” Your inner perfectionist will be reassured that it is following a
blueprint perfectly—it just so happened the blueprint calls for failure.
The Maximizer
Closely tied to perfectionism, the maximizer gives you the desire, the drive,
and sometimes even the compulsion to make “the best” decision. It’ s less
about making a perfect decision, in the absolute, Platonic-ideal sense, and
more about making the best possible decision, in a relative sense, in
comparison to others. It’ s about getting the most out of a situation.31
In a sense, perfectionism is more idealistic because it is measured
against an internal standard of perfection, whereas maximizing is measured
against an external standard: Will someone make a better choice than I will?
Was there a better choice available? Will a better choice eventually come
along?
The maximizer is rarely caused by social inhibition, but rather by our
own internal drive to get the best from the situation. In this sense, it is more
closely correlated with greed.

--- PAGE 134 ---
Though it is less personally destructive than the inner critic or the
impostor syndrome, the maximizer can still greatly hinder your ability to
achieve breakthroughs. Yes, this focus on maximizing does lead you to
make mar ginally better choices. And within a certain range, it is a good tool
for success. But it can easily go overboard, and you can find yourself
spending an hour on the exact wording for your e-mail or social media post
or on choosing the best brand of laundry deter gent.
Worse yet, leading authority Barry Schwartz has found through years of
research that the maximizer also leads you to:32
be less satisfied with your decision
get less happiness out of that decision and its outcome
be less happy in life in general
How do you put the maximizer on a leash? Schwartz has several
suggestions, such as setting a predetermined, arbitrary limit to the amount
of maximizing you allow yourself—limiting the amount of research you do
to choose a product, or the amount of time you spend figuring out the best
route, and so forth.
Unfortunately , arbitrary limits don’ t work very well for strong
maximizers. For those people, an arbitrary limit feels morally wrong,
almost sacrilegious. If this feels like you, what you can try instead is to
deputize your maximization.
For example, you could make an agreement with yourself that for any
product you’re considering buying, if you can find a review in a consumer
report Web site, you’ll go with their recommendation. These or ganizations
specialize precisely on the comparison and evaluation needed to make the
best possible choice (the essence of maximizing). The tests they put things
through are intense, extensive, and comprehensive, and deciding that you
want to keep reading further reviews (especially from amateurs if you’re
just surfing the Web) is just plain irrational. Make an agreement that you
will accept the amount of research and comparison the consumer reports
Web sites have done as good enough.
One of our clients deputized her health choices regarding to any new
health information that comes out to a few of her friends who she describes

--- PAGE 135 ---
as “health nuts.” “They are willing to spend hours poring over science
articles, cross-referencing studies, and keeping up with the latest research
with a passion and commitment that I could never match. So I’m quite
happy to simply ask them for their conclusions and recommendations and
go with that!”
Handling Fear: Quick Fixes
So now you know what happens when the sympathetic nervous system is
activated, and what a threat that is to breakthrough creativity . You’ve
learned a variety of tools to help prevent its activation. But what can you do
once it is activated?
To calm the sympathetic nervous system, you need to activate its
counterpart, the para sympathetic nervous system. The parasympathetic
nervous system, as psychologist Rick Hanson explains, is more
fundamental to life than the sympathetic nervous system (the fight-or -flight
response).
If your sympathetic system were sur gically disconnected—as it was in
years past as a last-resort treatment for hypertension—you would remain
alive and pretty much yourself, though unable to cope well with commuter
traffic, root for the home team, or have an or gasm. But if your PNS were
disconnected, you would quickly die.
Fortunately , we have several tools with which to access and activate the
parasympathetic nervous system. The mind can turn stress on, but it can
also turn it of f. Here are some quick fixes if you’re feeling that you are in a
less than creative state:
Check your breathing. When we’re feeling stressed, anxious, or
in another active-SNS state, our breathing is usually rapid and
shallow . Use the body’ s effect on the mind by taking deep, slow
breaths. As you now know , your actions influence your beliefs; if
you breathe as if you were calm, you’ll feel much calmer .
Change your body’ s position. As Stanford’ s Deborah Gruenfeld
found, people who assume expansive poses (taking up more
space) experience a measurable physiological shift. In one

--- PAGE 136 ---
experiment, assertiveness- and ener gy-promoting hormones rose
by 19 percent, while anxiety hormones fell by 25 percent.
Assuming a strong, confident physical posture will make you
genuinely feel more confident and more powerful. As you feel
more powerful, your body language will adapt accordingly . This
in turn gives you yet another biochemical boost, and the cycle
builds upon itself.33 All you have to do is get the cycle going,
and if you keep practicing, confident body language will become
second nature.
Imagine getting a great hug from someone you love for twenty
seconds. Of course, you may not have twenty seconds, but when
you do, this is remarkably ef fective.
Name your feelings. Try simply naming the feelings you’re
experiencing—anxiety , fear , shame, whatever they might be,
don’t worry about getting the “right” or “best” label—and adding
“and it’ s okay” or even “and it’ s welcome.” For instance, “I’m
feeling fear , and it’ s okay .”
Yawn. Yes, really! Yawning activates the parasympathetic
nervous system and relaxes our body . This is why you’ll often
see athletes yawn before a competition.
Relaxation
Harvard professor of medicine Dr . Herbert Benson is truly the pioneer for
Western medicine on how to activate the parasympathetic nervous system at
will, through a procedure now known as the Relaxation Response.34
In one of his recent studies, he showed that the mind can control genetic
activity through the Relaxation Response. Three groups of meditators were
studied: novices, short-term meditators (fewer than ten years), and long-
term meditators (ten years or more). In this cross-sectional study , blood
samples from all participants were analyzed to determine the expression of
more than twenty-two thousand genes on measures of inflammation and
cell lifespan.35

--- PAGE 137 ---
The Relaxation Response (RR) was observed to turn genes on or of f, to
amplify or decrease their ef fect. Eight weeks of RR on novices produced
the same results (af fecting the same genes in the same way) but to a lesser
degree. The probability of this occurring by chance was one in ten billion.
Furthermore, the RR increased the ef fect of cognitive restructuring:
when the mind is quieter , it is more receptive to new facts coming in. The
protocol described next is therefore an excellent preamble to any
visualization or mental rehearsal exercise.
Putting It into Practice: The Relaxation Response
Step 1: Pick a focus word, phrase, image, or use your breath as an object of focus.
Step 2: Find a quiet place and sit calmly in a comfortable position.
Step 3: Close your eyes.
Step 4: Progressively relax all your muscles.
Step 5: Breathe slowly and naturally . As you exhale, repeat or picture silently your focus word or
phrase, or simply focus on your breathing rhythm.
Step 6: Assume a passive attitude. When other thoughts appear , simply think Oh well,  and return
to your focus.
Step 7: Continue with this exercise for an average of twelve to fifteen minutes.
Step 8: Practice this technique at least once daily .
Oxytocin is another surefire way to quiet the sympathetic nervous
system and activate the calming parasympathetic nervous system. Paul Zak,
author of The Moral Molecule  and expert on the topic of oxytocin, was one
of our key science advisers for this book. Among other things, his research
showed that certain activities reliably cause people’ s brains to release
oxytocin. He gave us a list of his favorites.
Putting It into Practice: Paul Zak’ s Favorite Oxytocin Triggers
Give someone a hug. Aim for eight hugs a day!
Try compassion meditation. (W e’ll cover this next section.)

--- PAGE 138 ---
Dance.
Soak in a hot tub.
Surprise someone with a gift.
Pet a dog.
Take a hike with a friend.
Write a note of thanks to a teacher or mentor .
Thanks to neuroplasticity , all of the oxytocin-releasing techniques in
this exercise not only make you feel good in the moment, they also build
your oxcytocin-producing brain muscles. And although “oxytocin is a
purely social molecule, i.e., it requires a positive social stimulus for
release,” as Zak told us, this social stimulus need not be real: the right
imagined social stimulus would produce some of the same ef fects.
Gratitude
Gratitude can be both a state of mind and a feeling, and there are practices
and processes that can help you reach a state of mind or a state of heart, a
feeling, of gratitude. Some of us think  our way into gratitude; some of us
feel our way into gratitude.
Why is gratitude good for the breakthrough experience? Because it
releases oxytocin. A lot of dif ficult feelings will come up on the road to
breakthrough. Gratitude, and the oxytocin it releases, is a really good
remedy for most of them. Oxytocin will wash away stress chemicals in your
brain.
Research is clear that gratitude helps us live longer , and be healthier36
and even happier .37 By helping us think of things we already have—
whether material items, experiences, or cherished relationships—gratitude
acts as an antidote to negative feelings. Not only is it good for health and
happiness, it’ s also good for your social connections, friendships, and
family relationships. It will even increase your level of charisma. Truly.38
Gratitude is a really important tool. But few of us can easily get into a
space of gratitude for long periods of time. Human beings are instinctively
wired for hedonic adaptation: we tend to take our blessings for granted.39

--- PAGE 139 ---
And even with good intentions, there’ s a catch-22: telling yourself that
you “should” be grateful is often counterproductive, as it only makes you
feel guilty . If someone tells you “you should be grateful,” it’ s far more
likely to bring up resentment than gratitude.
Just like resolving to read all the books on your nightstand by the end of
the month, or trying to read War and Peace  in one go, it can be daunting to
try to be grateful for your whole life all at once. Instead, just as you would
start with one chapter , or the shortest book, pick a small part of your life
and be grateful for that.
Pick something, right now , anything that you could be grateful for: your
ability to see, a nice piece of art on the wall, or a fantastic sunset. If
gratitude feels cheesy , you can use the word “fortunate.” “I am fortunate
because I can walk.” It doesn’ t have to be something profound; small
positive things can have a significant impact on our brain.
This is one of the few cases where comparison can really help, if you
use it right. If you’re having trouble accessing gratitude, try comparing your
situation with others who are less fortunate. But don’ t make the mistake of
choosing an extreme example right of f the bat.
We know someone who unfortunately has the reflex of comparing his
situation with the worst possible one he can possibly imagine: the victims
of the Darfur genocide. This creates an immediate sense of guilt that he
“should” be going around in a constant state of gratitude, 24/7, because his
situation is so much better .
This kind of comparison doesn’ t help. Yes, it is absolutely important to
stay aware of what’ s happening in the world, and to do everything we can to
stop the horrors that are unfolding. But when you’re just starting out
learning to feel gratitude, that gap can be too huge and backfire or be
counterproductive.
Instead, start close to home. We evolved in small tribes, and in many
respects that’ s how our brains still operate. You know how they say “a man
feels rich when he earns more than his neighbor or brother -in-law”? Same
concept.
Scan your body from head to toe and find a few things to be grateful
for. Could be as simple as your ability to see, hear , or breathe. You think
I’m kidding? There are many people for whom every single breath is a
struggle.

--- PAGE 140 ---
Think of one small luxury you have that many others around you do
not. Do you have keys in your pocket, or anywhere near you, right now?
Listen to Geor ge Hill’ s extraordinary , well-told memories of being
homeless for twelve years.40 “Now , every time it rains and I have keys in
my pocket, I have a joy of life that you cannot believe.” It is so very , very
easy to fall through the cracks of the system. The loss of a job, an accident
or illness leading to hospital bills you cannot repay—and before you know
it, you too are “one of them.”
Perhaps the healthiest object of comparison to elicit gratitude in you is
your former self. In addition to getting you to focus on your blessings, this
gives you a sense of progression, of upward movement, that in itself is a
wonderfully solidifying feeling.
Think back to high school. For the 2 percent of you who enjoyed high
school, this exercise will not work. But it will be of interest for the other 98
percent of us. Remember some of your dif ficult moments: Perhaps the sense
of doom you felt as you came to class totally unprepared for the calculus,
chemistry , or history test. Perhaps the general feeling of awkwardness that
is the all-encompassing experience of being fourteen, fifteen, or sixteen
years old. Perhaps the deep surety that this uncool, misunderstood hell was
going to be your life forever.
How dif ferent is your life today? How much better is your life? Be
thankful for your independence, for owning your own car , for not living
with your parents, for your good friends, for a spouse who loves you. Take
a moment and feel gratitude for these changes, changes in your
environment, and changes in yourself.
Looking back to how we were in the past to see how much we’ve
grown gives us perspective on all the good things currently in our lives—
the perspective we need to truly feel gratitude for what we have.
You could have a running list of accomplishments on a sticky note on
your computer to help you realize how far you’ve come. Every month, or
even every week, choose one accomplishment to bask in. It costs you
nothing, and it rewires your brain in very advantageous ways.
For most of his childhood, David did not have a lot of friends. “I
remember delivering to my parents the list they had requested of friends to

--- PAGE 141 ---
invite to my Bar Mitzvah. There were three names on the list. It was a very
lonely way to go through life.”
By his own accord, the reason David didn’ t have many friends is that he
wasn’ t always the most emotionally or socially attuned person. “That’ s
putting it very kindly ,” he corrected. “Some would say I was just
completely oblivious to other people’ s feelings.”
Nowadays, David still doesn’ t host many parties, and when he does,
they’re for a very small group. But it’ s not because he doesn’ t have any
friends. Quite the opposite: he has too many friends, and as an introvert
inviting them all to one party would be exhausting.
When David has to decide between two or three things he’ s been
invited to do over a weekend, he thinks back to his lonelier years and feels
gratitude for his current social life.
Have you ever noticed how most of us tend to focus on the things in our
life that are going wrong—all the messes we see from the inside—yet we
tend to compare this with all the things that seem to be going right in others’
lives—as seen from the outside? That’ s not a fair comparison: we’re
comparing our insides with someone else’ s outside.
But we can make this work to our advantage by viewing our life
through a third-party lens. Of all the gratitude tools, this is one of our
favorites. To complete this exercise, you will need to sit down with a few
minutes to spare. It is best to have a pen and some paper available. Writing
accesses dif ferent parts of our brain and af fects our beliefs in ways that
other modes of expression do not.41 The act of committing things to writing
has been shown to be critical both in changing a person’ s mind42 and in
making imagined stories feel more real.43
Write about your life as though an outside person was describing it.
Focus on all of your positive aspects as a human.
Write about your occupation and the people you are surrounded by in
your workplace. Give a description of some of your most meaningful
personal relationships and consider the good things these people would say
about you. Find positive things that have happened today no matter the size
or significance.
Take the time to write down this narrative. Just thinking about it won’ t
be as ef fective.

--- PAGE 142 ---
For daily practice, we highly recommend the gratitude journals from
Intelligent Change. You’ll find the link in the resources section of this book.
One of Olivia’ s favorite clients decided to try the gratitude tools with
his entire family . Initially , they were skeptical. “I thought it was a little
goofy , like Thanksgiving when we all go around the table and talk about
what we are giving thanks for that year ,” his wife said.
Robert was glad his family was joining him for the journey because it
gave him the discipline to keep at it.
The results, he is happy to report, were dramatic. Now , before any of
the family members complain about something, they’ll pause to first say out
loud why they are grateful. This experience has helped them develop more
appreciation for what’ s going well in their lives, and reframe negative
experiences as positive ones.
Putting It into Practice: Morning Gratitude
The next time you wake up in the morning, try this exercise to access gratitude.
You’re waking up in the morning. First, you breathe. Think about that: you are breathing.
Countless geological miracles had to happen in order for you to breathe. Just the right mixture of
gases had to be present to make life possible. And, for that matter , you just happen to be living on a
planet that is exactly the right distance from our star , not too close, not too far , just right for
humans to live comfortably . Any closer and it would be like Venus, far too hot for life to exist; any
farther out and it would be like Mars, just too cold for life to survive.
And then, as Bill Bryson puts it: “Consider the fact that for 3.8 billion years [going right back
to the first microbes on Earth] . . . every one of your forebears on both sides has been . . . healthy
enough to reproduce, and suf ficiently blessed by fate and circumstances to live long enough to do
so.”44
Not one of your pertinent ancestors was squashed, devoured, drowned, starved, stranded, stuck,
untimely wounded, or otherwise deflected from their life’ s quest of delivering a tiny char ge of
genetic material to the right partner at the right moment in order to perpetuate the only possible
sequence of hereditary combinations that could result—eventually , astoundingly—in you.
Now , you open your eyes. Think of the miracle, of all the little rods and cones that allow you to
see. Think of the incredibly complex mechanical systems that must work in order for you to be
able to move, to get out of bed.
Your bed. That’ s another thing to be grateful for . As is your bedroom. You have a roof over
your head. And if you flip a switch to turn on the light, think of all that’ s come before you, to make
electricity not just possible, but incredibly convenient. You make a small movement, and suddenly
there is light. For most of human history , right up until the last two hundred years or so, such a
power was considered to be absolutely godly .

--- PAGE 143 ---
Are you heading to the bathroom? Turning a tap? That’ s pure, clean water coming out. More
than 700 million people in this world do not have access to clean water—that’ s one in nine people.
You have not just access, but easy access to clean water . Plenty of clean water . As much as you
like. But wait—it’ s not just clean water . You have the luxury of hot water . Without boiling it,
without building a fire—all you have to do is turn a tap. Think of all the feats of engineering that
have been necessary for that to happen.
And all this, even before your first cup of cof fee. Can you imagine the number of things that
have happened to make breakfast possible? All the people, processes, systems that were slowly ,
ever so slowly built over the years? All the innovations that have taken place in order for the food
and drink you desire to so conveniently be waiting for you in your kitchen?
Did you open the refrigerator to get some milk? That’ s a refrigerator you’ve got there, my
friend. A miracle of modern technology . Speak to anyone from before 1913 and they would simply
not believe you. You are so rich that you can af ford your very own personal electric cooling
chamber? With light?
In fact, before 1834, what you are taking for granted in your kitchen would’ve seemed as
magical as teleportation seems to us. Think of it: having a refrigerator in your kitchen would seem
to the vast majority of humans in history like having a personal teleportation portal inside your
home.
All this to be grateful for . Awed and amazed by . And you still haven’ t sat down for breakfast.
Self-forgiveness and Self-compassion
The creativity needed for breakthroughs cannot flourish in a self-critical
brain. Research has demonstrated time and again that fear of judgment,
whether from others or from oneself, impairs creativity . Interestingly , self-
criticism was particularly harmful to creativity .45
What’ s the antidote to self-judgment and self-criticism? Self-
forgiveness. Though it might sound like “fluf f,” it’ s actually a cornerstone
of the training of people whose performance lives and dies by hard
numbers: athletes.
“Athletes who get injured often blame themselves for getting injured,”
Dr. JoAnn Dahlkoetter , a sports psychologist who has coached five
Olympic gold medalists and the author of Your Performing Edge,  explained.
“That blame, shame, and guilt slows down the healing. This is where self-
forgiveness is so important.”46
As you know , skillfully handling failure means both rebounding from
and learning from each failure. To do this, you have to be able to stay in a
productive mental state. This isn’ t easy , because our natural tendency when
failure hits is to beat ourselves up. 

--- PAGE 144 ---
In the course of researching this book, we discovered that the self-
compassion techniques used to quiet the inner critic when aiming for
charisma are just as ef fective to quiet the inner critic on the road to
breakthroughs. What follows is adapted from Olivia’ s first book, The
Charisma Myth.
Self-for giveness, though uncomfortable for many of us, is an essential
practice for breakthrough thinking. Without self-compassion, you can kill
the breakthrough experience before it begins.
First, let’ s distinguish three key concepts:
Self-confidence is our belief in our ability to do or to learn how
to do something.
Self-esteem is how much we approve of or value ourselves. It’ s
often a comparison-based evaluation (whether measured against
other people or against our own internal standards for approval).
Self-compassion is how much warmth we can have for
ourselves, especially when we’re going through a dif ficult
experience.
It’s quite possible for people to have high self-confidence but low self-
esteem or self-compassion. These people may consider themselves
competent, masterful even, but that does not translate into liking
themselves. These people can be exceedingly hard on themselves when they
don’t succeed.
Behavioral science research indicates that it may be healthier to focus
on self-compassion than on self-esteem, because the latter is based on self-
evaluation and social comparison.47 Self-esteem is more of a roller coaster ,
contingent on how we believe we compare to others. It also tends to
correlate with narcissism. Self-compassion, in contrast, is based on self-
acceptance, and “self-compassion does all the good things that self-esteem
was supposed to do,” says Wharton professor of management and
psychology Adam Grant. *
Individuals who score high on self-compassion scales display greater
emotional resilience and fewer negative reactions to life’ s difficulties, such

--- PAGE 145 ---
as receiving unflattering feedback.48 Higher self-compassion correlates to a
greater sense of personal responsibility for the outcome of events; it helps
predict levels of accountability . People who score high on self-compassion
also have a lower tendency for denial. This makes sense: personal mistakes
would generate less self-criticism, so people would be more willing to
admit to them.
In many cultures people often associate the term “self-compassion”
with self-indulgence or self-pity . Surprisingly , the opposite is true: solid
behavioral science research shows that the higher one’ s level of self-
compassion, the lower one’ s level of self-pity .49
You can think of the dif ference between the two this way: self-
compassion is feeling that what happened to you is unfortunate, whereas
self-pity is feeling that what happened to you is unfair . Self-pity can lead to
resentment or bitterness, and to feeling more isolated and alienated. In
contrast, self-compassion often leads to increased feelings of
connectedness.
Another assumption we often hear is: “But if I stop beating myself up,
won’ t I lose the motivation to keep growing? My inner critic, never
satisfied, always telling me I can do better , that’ s what drives me to success!
I don’ t want to lose that!”
People find motivation and drive in dif ferent ways. To motivate
themselves when facing a challenge, many are driven by a voice in their
head, a critical voice they react to, trying to prove it wrong, quiet it,
challenge it, or run from it. Such people often tell us that they’re afraid that
if they lose this self-critical part of themselves, they will lose their drive.
For some people, this is true. Some people push themselves to their
breakthroughs by being in a relationship with their critical part. That’ s okay .
If you are one of these people, then by all means stay in a relationship
with this aspect of yourself. Let it continue to drive you forward into
unknown lands and breakthrough ideas. The thing to be mindful of is that
you are critical of your ideas and processes rather than of yourself.
Should you be so confident about this idea? Is it a good idea? Is it truly
a breakthrough? Might you do a little more research or experimenting to be
sure it’ s truly a breakthrough? Do some more associative thinking? Rather

--- PAGE 146 ---
than destroying your confidence, a constructive critical voice pushes back
on any tendency you have to sit back and say “that’ s good enough.”
However , for some people the internal critic attacks and destroys their
self-confidence and willingness to try new things. For some people, that
critical voice is paralyzing and often kills interesting thoughts before
they’ve even begun. That critical part can, in some people, take the ener gy
needed for breakthrough thinking and redirect it to finding ever more things
to criticize about the self. For those people, the inner critical voice is an
obstacle to breakthrough thinking, not a motivator .
No one is immune from the paralyzing force of the inner critic. We will
all face times when a series of things will go wrong, “just one damn thing
after another ,” all in a row , and our fortitude will be tested. At such times,
tools like self-for giveness and self-compassion can be saving graces.
Self-compassion delivers an impressive array of benefits: decreased
anxiety , depression, and self-criticism; improved relationships and greater
feelings of social connectedness and satisfaction with life; increased ability
to handle negative events; and even improved immune system
functioning.50
Sounds great, doesn’ t it? Unfortunately , self-compassion isn’ t taught in
school. In fact, in today’ s culture it sounds indulgent and unjustified, and
can feel very alien. Many of us don’ t have a very clear idea of what it is to
begin with.
Kristin Nef f, one of compassion’ s foremost researchers, defines self-
compassion as a three-step process: First, realizing that we’re experiencing
difficulties. Second, responding with kindness and understanding toward
ourselves when we are suf fering or feel inadequate, rather than being
harshly self-critical. Third, realizing that whatever we’re going through is
commonly experienced by all human beings, and remembering that
everyone goes through dif ficult times like these.
When things go wrong in our lives, it’ s easy to assume that other people
are having an easier time. Recognizing instead that everyone at some point
has had or will have the very experience you’re having now can help you
feel like part of the lar ger human experience rather than isolated and
alienated.

--- PAGE 147 ---
When our inner critic starts pointing out our misdeeds and
imperfections, it will often make us feel that everyone else is doing better ,
that we’re the only ones who are this flawed. Self-criticism is much
stronger when our suf fering seems due to our own perceived failures and
inadequacies than when it seems due to external circumstances. This is
when self-compassion is the most precious.
One incredibly powerful self-compassion practice we know is a
millennia-old Buddhist one called Metta, which roughly translates as
“loving-kindness.” Metta is the deliberate practice of developing kind
intentions toward all beings.
When the brains of dedicated Metta practitioners were examined and
tested by neuroscientists, significant dif ferences came to light. Not only did
they emit deeper brain waves, they also bounced back from stress scenarios
much faster , and they showed particular enhancement in the left frontal lobe
of their cortices, the “happy region” of the brain.51
You may remember that earlier we wrote that it is often ef fective to
quiet the inhibiting frontal lobes to increase the likelihood of a
breakthrough. Why then are we suggesting a practice to strengthen the
frontal lobes?
By making us happier and more loving towards ourselves, the practice
of Metta quiets our inner critic. When our inner critic is quieter , we are
more likely to achieve a breakthrough. So while Metta enhances our frontal
lobes, it also changes them, making them less prone to inhibit our thinking.
Another interesting part of this is that while the act of meditating shuts
down the DN, meditation actually strengthens the brain regions—and the
connections between them—that make up the DN. So you probably won’ t
have a breakthrough while meditating, but meditating will strengthen your
DN and make it more likely that you’ll have one when you’re wandering
and you enter the breakthrough state of mind.
Metta is a wonderful way to counter your inner critic’ s attacks, and with
its many benefits, it is also ef fective at boosting charisma. This is, however ,
a highly uncomfortable practice for many of us. When Olivia started it, it
was more than uncomfortable—it was downright awkward. Even if it feels
weird for you, too, do it anyway .

--- PAGE 148 ---
First, a Metta warm-up adapted from Nef f’s work. Pick someone for
whom you have tremendous af fection. In fact, it could be a person, a pet, or
even a stuf fed animal. Now imagine the two of you as a unit, facing the
world together . And now , see if you can wish this unit well: “May we be
happy . May we be safe from harm.” Use whatever words feel comfortable
for you.
The visualization below will guide you through a customized form of
Metta step-by-step. It has been crafted to take advantage of two instinctive
human tendencies: our absorption of images and our respect for authority . If
you’d prefer to hear Olivia guide you through this exercise, you’ll find a
recording online at www .TheButterfly .net. Throughout this exercise, you
may notice a certain rhythm created by the repetitions. That is indeed their
purpose; just be willing to give it a try .
Putting It into Practice: Metta
Sit comfortably , close your eyes, and take two or three deep breaths. As you inhale,
imagine drawing in masses of clean air toward the top of your head; then let it whoosh
through you from head to toe as you exhale, washing all concerns away .
Think of any occasion in your life when you performed a good deed, however great or
small. Just one good action—one moment of truth, generosity , or courage. Focus on
that memory for a moment.
Now think of one being, whether present or past, mythical or actual—Jesus, Buddha,
Mother Teresa, the Dalai Lama—who could have great af fection for you. This could be
a person, a pet, or even a stuf fed animal.
Picture this being in your mind. Imagine their warmth, their kindness and compassion.
See it in their eyes and face. Feel their warmth radiating toward you, enveloping you.
See yourself through their eyes with warmth, kindness, and compassion. Feel them
giving you complete for giveness for everything your inner critic says is wrong. You are
completely and absolutely for given. You have a clean slate.
Feel them giving you wholehearted acceptance. You are accepted as you are, right now ,
at this stage of growth, imperfections and all.
Putting It into Practice: Acceptance Manifesto

--- PAGE 149 ---
You are perfect. At this stage of development, you are perfect.
At this stage of growth, you are perfect.
At this stage of perfection, you are perfect.
With everything that’ s in your head and heart, you are perfect.
With all your imperfections, you are perfect.
For this phase of growth, you are perfect.
You are fully approved just the way you are, at this stage of development, right now .
After going through the Metta exercise, our clients often report a
physical sense of relief, their shoulders sagging during the for giveness
visualization, and then warmth rising during the self-approval process.
Many people feel warmth in their solar plexus region. Some describe a kind
of “exquisite ache,” or feeling “very tender .” No matter what you
experience, if you are feeling anything, it means it’ s working.
Even when the experience itself doesn’ t “feel” like it’ s working, Metta
is worth doing because of the spillover ef fect it produces. Often, though the
exercise itself feels disconcerting, you will notice throughout the rest of the
day that you are more present, connecting better with others, and better able
to absorb and enjoy the good moments in your life. As self-compassion
researcher and author of The Mindful Path to Self-Compassion  Christopher
Germer puts it: “A  moment of self-compassion like this can change your
entire day . A string of such moments can change the course of your life.”52
You can use Metta visualization anytime you experience an attack of
the internal critic. As Germer suggests, you can think of self-compassion as
standing up to self-harm the same way you’d stand up to something
threatening a loved one.
Researchers who started experimenting with these kinds of
visualizations with highly self-critical people reported “significant
reductions in depression, anxiety , self-criticism, shame, and inferiority ,”
while noting a “significant increase in feelings of warmth and reassurance
for the self.”53
Now that you know how to handle the fear of failure, let’ s look at how
to handle the experience of failure itself.

--- PAGE 150 ---
KEY  TAKEA WAYS
Fear and anxiety are major inhibitors of breakthroughs.
Catastrophizing only serves to strengthen our negativity bias and
shut us down to breakthroughs.
Failure is unavoidable and natural. We must learn to handle our fear
of it.
With intentional breakthroughs, fear appears on the road to
breakthrough, focused on failure; with unintentional breakthroughs,
fear occurs after the breakthrough, focused on implementation.
Common manifestations of the fear of failure are:
The impostor syndrome: the fear that you will be exposed as a
fraud. Solution: create a new self-image and support it with
concrete evidence.
The inner critic: the voice in your head beating you up. Solution:
find out who you actually mean when you tell yourself
“everybody” does this, then create a new “everybody” to think of
instead.
The perfectionist: the feeling that you’re never good enough,
never doing enough. Solution: know that mistakes are precious
and that others like your imperfection.
The maximizer: the drive to do better than everyone else, to do
more. Solution: place limits on how far you are willing to go.
Fear is best handled with relaxation, gratitude, self-for giveness, and
self-compassion.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 151 ---
Chapter 8
                  
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 152 ---
The Failure Wasps
Letting Go of Shame
SO WHA T, EXACTL Y, is it that we fear? Of course, we fear the actual
consequences of failure, whether tangible or intangible, whether they are in
the form of money , time, ef fort, or reputation, among other things. But we
also fear the experience itself.
And it’ s no wonder: for many of us, the internal experience of failure is
one of shame, dismay , disappointment, or even despair . Understandably ,
this isn’ t something we look forward to. This is where failur e skills  come in.
Failure skills ensure that you stay in a learning mode, the right
psychological state to learn everything there is to learn from this failure and
to rebound fast so you can try again.
Many of the sports psychologists and coaches we interviewed consider
failure as a mini-trauma. Dr . Wes Sime, a sport psychologist with two PhDs,
in sports science and peak performance psychology , told us: “Athletes
actually suf fer microtraumas: the embarrassment of having ‘blown it’  in
front of an audience; possibly the embarrassment and shame of having let
your team down.” And then there’ s the potential blow to your earning
power , loss of future sponsorships, and so forth.
Failure comes in dif ferent flavors. The four categories below represent
a descending order of knowledge and control. For instance, category #1
means you had full knowledge and full control. Category #2 means you had
imperfect knowledge but full control. And so forth.
You may need dif ferent remedies. Self-generated failure may need self-
forgiveness. Externally generated failure may need the “resentment letter”
technique.

--- PAGE 153 ---
This chapter will give you the tools you need to become more resilient
to failure. Resiliency to failure is a subset of the broader category of
resiliency to hardship. Failure is a form of hardship, one of many that we
can experience. If you are resilient to failure, you are less af fected by it and
bounce back faster . This has a bonus ef fect: since you know you’ve got the
skills to handle failure and are now more resilient to it, you’ll be less afraid
of it.
Reframing, or  The Baby in the Backseat
Imagine that it’ s 9 P.M. on a Monday evening, after a long and tedious day at
work, and you’re finally driving home as darkness sets in. It’ s your
significant other ’s birthday , and you’ve been planning the evening for
months. Despite your tiredness, you’re smiling as you look forward to the
evening, happily anticipating spending some quality time together .
Suddenly , a lar ge red sedan comes screeching into your lane out of
nowhere. With your heart pounding and your hands gripping the steering
wheel, you slam on the brakes. Not only did the driver cut you of f, he’ s now

--- PAGE 154 ---
swerved out of your lane, making the car to your right screech its tires.
“What an idiot! Reckless driver!” you think as anger sur ges through your
veins.
Your physical response to this encounter is the very definition of the
fight-or -flight response. It causes your heart rate to increase as your muscles
tighten. Your body is overcome with stress-induced hormones, overrun with
the stress and anger that this event has generated. You cannot bring these
emotions home with you. Unfortunately , you have only a few minutes to
recover from this experience, and the powerful impression it has left on
your mind will not subside easily .
Once the fight-or -flight response is aroused, it’ s hard to quiet down.
Anger is a dif ficult emotion to flush out of our system, which is why an
unpleasant traf fic encounter in the morning can stay on our minds for hours
and sometimes all day .
If you aimed to simply suppress the anger , you would be paying a high
price. When people are induced into a negative emotional state and then
asked to suppress negative emotions, their internal negative experience
often remains unchanged and they sustain elevated stress responses in their
brain and cardiovascular system.1 Emotion suppression works as poorly as
thought suppression.
But what if you happened to learn that this apparently reckless driver ,
who was driving so erratically , was actually a distraught mother whose
baby was choking in the backseat? She was desperately trying to pull over
into the breakdown lane, while reaching back to save her baby’ s life.
Would that immediately reduce your anger?
For most people it does.
If you decide to change your perception of events (this is technically
called cognitive reappraisal, but we prefer to call it reframing), you will
effectively decrease your brain’ s stress levels. Researchers using fMRI
machines at Stanford concluded that deciding to change beliefs was a “far
more ef fective and healthier solution than attempting to repress or ignore
emotions.”2
We rarely know for certain what motivates a person’ s actions, so why
not choose the explanation that is most helpful to us? Create a version of
events that gets you into the mental states you need for breakthrough

--- PAGE 155 ---
thinking. Though it may sound outlandish at first, choosing to reframe your
perspective is actually the smartest and most rational thing to do.
Let’s say you’re going to check on the sales of a new product you’ve
just of fered, and the results are dismal. If you go into a spiral of self-
criticism and self-doubt, you know what happens: you’re no longer in a
rational learning mode, so you won’ t be able to accurately parse out reasons
and consequences, causes and ef fects.
Reframing means simply switching the frame through which you view
an experience or an event. It’ s changing your mind about the way you
describe an experience.
Cognitive  reframing is a rational, logic-based ar gument: “Here’ s why
it’s not as bad as you think.” Social pr oof reframing, in contrast, does not
need any logic; it says, “This happens to a lot of people” or even better yet,
“This admired figure had this experience too.”
Here’ s a great example of cognitive reframing. One of our collaborators
told us: “My husband likes to buy and resell art for side money . His mentor ,
an expert in the field, advised my husband not to look at a bad purchase
decision as a loss or deficit, but to consider it tuition, since this trade is not
one you can go to school to learn. So he views his botched purchases as a
tuition of sorts that he would have had to pay had he chosen art as a full-
time career . And considering the current rate of college tuition, he has lots
of room for error (aka learning).”
This is a fantastic reframe: don’ t see the outcome as a possible failure,
but rather as guaranteed learning . And that learning will lead either to a
pivot or to the end of the road. Imagine that, when the outcome happens and
it’s not the one you were hoping for , it’s like a pinball machine saying,
“Congratulations, you’ve learned something and you get to play again!” In
this frame, the end of the road (success) is actually the less attractive option,
because you don’ t get to play again!
Sometimes our clients ask us: “How do we balance the hope that our
efforts will achieve successful innovation with the probability that each
attempt will fail? It can’ t be right to assume failure, because motivation
then becomes an issue.”
We tell them: See each attempt as guaranteed learning. No matter what
happens, you’ll learn. You’ll learn, as Edison did, countless ways to not

--- PAGE 156 ---
invent the lightbulb. The answer is to see learning as the ultimate prize. You
may have heard of the “growth mindset,” also called the “learning stance.”3
Take a longer -term view of your ef forts. You are not looking to succeed
at this one thing right in front of you. You are looking to succeed at making
yourself a fantastic innovator . In this mental frame, nothing is a step
backward, because you are always learning something new . Sometimes all
you learn is “don’ t do that again.” But that’ s still a step forward.
Let’s say you’re Edison working on finding a commercially viable
lightbulb. And let’ s say , for the sake of ar gument, that there are 10,000
possible filaments. You manage to narrow that down to 1,600 by selecting
only materials with high resistance at low ener gies. Now the testing begins.
The chances are that each test will fail. But a learning stance, a growth
mindset, looks at each failure and says, “I am now one step closer to finding
the right one.” You obtained guaranteed learning.
When Elon Musk’ s SpaceX attempted to land a rocket back on a bar ge
in the ocean so it could be reused, the landing failed. But even though the
landing didn’ t end in success, the fact that the rocket hit the bar ge at all is
extremely encouraging. As Musk puts it, this “failure” “bodes well for the
future.”4 You can do this too: see the failure as “guaranteed learning,“ and
therefore something that bodes well for the future. It helps maintain
emotional momentum.
Astro Teller recommends that instead of seeing what you put out into
the world as a final product, imagine that you’re saying to the world: “What
do you think? How can we make this better?” As he told us, “It’ s much
better to find out now what we missed than to find out years from now , with
an incredible amount of additional expense and emotional investment.”5
In some cases, a great way to get yourself into a “willing to fail”
mindset is to see whatever you are doing as an experiment, something
you’re just trying once, with no commitment to follow through, and to
phrase it to yourself as “it’ s interesting and I’m curious.” For example, if
you’re trying a new behavior and someone comments on it, you can simply
say, “It’s a social experiment,” and perhaps even mention an article about it,
which distances the potentially embarrassment-triggering part of the
experiment from your social identity .

--- PAGE 157 ---
Creativity expert Tina Seelig likes this saying: “Genius is the ability to
make the most mistakes in the shortest period of time.”6 As she explains,
each of those mistakes provides experimental data and an opportunity to
learn something new . She, too, suggests changing our vocabulary from
“failures” to “data,“ to enhance your (and others’) willingness to
experiment.
In her wonderful book inGenius,  which we highly recommend to
anyone interested in creativity , she explains that master inventors appreciate
unexpected outcomes such as failures, because each one teaches them
something important on the road to a breakthrough idea. They believe it’ s
up to each of us to mine our failures for valuable information and insights.
The key is seeing the process of trial and error as a series of experiments on
the way to a success.
Take a hint from Silicon Valley and don’ t call it a failure, call it a pivot .
Feel how dif ferent the word sounds and feels. Changing the language is one
of the many ways they destigmatize failure; another way is to glorify it.
Venture capitalist Randy Komisar says, “Silicon Valley recognizes that
failure is an unavoidable part of the search for success.”7
Detaching
In order to handle failure well, you need to learn how to detach from the
thoughts and emotions it can evoke. The key to detaching? Realizing that:
just because it’ s in your head doesn’ t mean it’ s true.  Just because it feels
true doesn’ t mean it is true.
Negative thoughts have power over you because you believe that what
your brain is giving you is an accurate portrait of reality . This, however , is
not true. Your brain often looks at the world through a distorted lens.
In one well-known study , Harvard researchers asked the participants to
watch a short video in which two groups of people passed around a
basketball. They were asked to count the number of passes made by one of
the teams. Partway through the video, a woman walked onto the court
wearing a full gorilla suit.
After watching the video, the participants were asked if they saw
anything out of the ordinary take place. In most groups more than half

--- PAGE 158 ---
missed the gorilla even though it had waved its arms at the camera!8
We know what you’re thinking, you’d do better? Let’ s see:
Take a look around the room you’re in. Notice everything that’ s black.
Now you’re looking at this page again. Good. Keep your eyes here.
Without looking up, try to name everything you saw that was red.
Go ahead. We’ll wait.
. . .
Okay , take a look around again.
Now do you see a lot of things that are red?
Interesting, right?
So why did this happen? Our brains have a lot to do. There is limited
space dedicated to conscious attention. This constrains the amount of
information we can be aware of at any one time. If the visual world is an
ocean of information, then at any one time we only consciously perceive a
small creek. The ocean would overwhelm us.
So our brains focus on information they consider relevant. Our brains
make choices about what to pay attention to. Those choices mean we miss
things, and that means our brains do not provide us with an accurate
representation of reality . Our worldviews are incomplete.
Most of the time our brains make good choices and we draw a fairly
accurate portrait of reality . But there are times when our minds distort
reality . Often this distortion skews negative because our brains, in an ef fort
to keep us safe, finds negative elements the most relevant. It’ s the negativity
bias we talked about in the previous chapter .
Diane is a young project manager in char ge of the biggest project of her career . Shortly
after the project begins, she gets a call from Sarah, her point of contact with the client.
Sarah tells her , “I think you’re incredible at your job. I’ve been raving about you and your
excellent work for the past year . My boss doesn’ t seem to get it. My best guess is he just
wasn’ t impressed when you guys first met, and he hasn’ t gotten a chance to change his
mind. That being said, I’d like you, Diane, to be in char ge of all our company’ s projects.
Your work is so good, I’m sure my boss will be wowed when he sees it. I want you to
present your work at the company’ s next management meeting.”
Sarah said many positive things about Diane—that she’ s incredible at her job, does
excellent work, that she’ s being put in char ge of all the projects. But what Diane’ s brain
finds most relevant is the one negative piece: Sarah’ s boss wasn’ t impressed with her . If
you’ve ever found yourself stuck on the one negative piece of information you heard in a
conversation, you know how devastating it can be to your confidence.

--- PAGE 159 ---
The mind evolved to worry about everything that could potentially go wrong. In this
sense, the mind is like the Jewish mother who sends you a telegram saying, “Start
worrying. Details to follow .” Or as psychologist Steven Hayes put it, “Hello, this is your
mind speaking. Do you realize you need to worry?”9
Detaching is essential for handling the inner critic. Rather than being the voice in your
head, it becomes one of many , which we all have. To maximize detaching, you can even
give the inner critic a name and character—call it Oscar the Grouch or Dennis the Menace,
and see it as a childlike cartoon character .
When you find yourself stuck on a negative piece of information and
spiraling down, remind yourself that your perception of reality is more than
likely of f. If negative information was put in front of it, your brain will
focus on it, following its negativity bias. It is likely declaring the negative
elements relevant and omitting some positives entirely .
Putting It into Practice: Fear No More
The techniques below are designed to help you quiet the ef fects of negative thoughts. Notice which
ones work best for you, and practice until they become a reflex.
Don’ t give your thoughts the benefit of the doubt. Sure, they’re yours. But that doesn’ t
mean they’re accurate. Start from the notion that you probably missed a lot of things
and there are positive elements waiting to be noticed.
Imagine your thoughts like graf fiti on a wall.
Name what you are experiencing: anger , anxiety , self-criticism. Naming what you are
experiencing can help you neutralize it.
Make it less personal. Don’ t say, “I’m feeling ashamed.” Instead say , “There is shame
being felt.” Take a step back. Observe the experience like an anthropologist observing a
ritual. Imagine that you’re a scientist observing a phenomenon: “Fascinating. There are
self-critical thoughts happening.”
Imagine looking at the Earth from space. Now come closer , see your country , your
neighborhood, your house. Here you are, this one person, having this experience on this
planet right now .
Imagine your negative thoughts are a podcast. Take of f your headphones, set your
music player aside.
Lay out what it would look like if everything you’re worried about happens, if
everything that can go wrong does. Now notice that you survived this scenario.

--- PAGE 160 ---
Remember all the times before when you felt a similar negativity or anxiety . You didn’ t
think you’d make it through then. And yet you did.
The skill is in knowing how to handle  the negative thoughts, rather than
trying to suppress them or ar gue with them.
Steven Hayes and his colleagues asked a group of subjects to not think
of yellow Jeeps for a few minutes. Some subjects described the immediate
appearance of yellow Jeeps. Other were able to suppress the thought for a
short time, but the yellow Jeeps roared into their brains. The participants
were thinking about yellow Jeeps for days and sometimes weeks afterward.
Because trying to suppress a self-critical thought only makes it more
central to your thinking, it’ s a far better strategy to aim to neutralize it.
Destigmatizing an experience means reducing its power by simply
understanding that it’ s normal, common, and nothing to be ashamed of. By
doing so, you lift the stigma of shame of f the experience, which is critical,
because when in shame, you can’ t think straight.
Our minds’  natural tendency when encountering failure is to imagine
the absolute worst-case scenario. With social proof, you can understand that
“everyone” or “most people” go through this experience.
The way we react to failure is actually very similar to the way we react
to grief. Grief is the feeling of something precious irretrievably lost; failure
is a loss of something you presumably cared a lot about. The best way to
understand grief is through a sequence known as the Kübler -Ross model.
1. Denial: “This cannot have happened.” “There must be a
mistake.”
2. Anger: When the individual recognizes that denial cannot
continue, he becomes frustrated. “How the #$%! can this have
happened?” “Who screwed up?”
3. Bargaining: “There must be a way to make this un-happen.
Maybe if we . . .”
4. Depression: “It really happened.” “W e failed. We suck. We
might as well give up.”
5. Acceptance: “Okay , we failed. Now what?” Acceptance is the
last stage before moving on.

--- PAGE 161 ---
© Adam Klein
We can’ t avoid this dip in happiness, productivity , and creativity , but we
can reduce its depth and duration by accepting it rather than fighting against
it. As Shawn Achor told us: “The more you accept the inevitable post-
failure productivity dip, the faster you’ll move through it.”10
Dr. JoAnn Dahlkoetter told us: “It is absolutely critical to go through
the stages of grief, to process those stages of anger , sadness, and so forth.
Grief, when ignored, can lead to depression.” Dahlkoetter remarked that
very few teams or or ganizations take the time to grieve when a project fails.
Instead, they try to move right on, as if the failure hadn’ t had any emotional
impact. “Unfortunately , repressing feelings just makes things worse,” she
told us.
You need a mourning process: whether it’ s a business opportunity or a
gold medal that was lost, it’ s important to take the time to grieve, to mourn
the failure before you try to learn from it. You’ll be tempted to skip right
past these uncomfortable feelings. Our instinct, whenever we feel
discomfort, is to grab onto the first thing we think will make the discomfort

--- PAGE 162 ---
go away . In this case, wanting to avoid the blues of mourning the failure,
and knowing that being in a productive mode feels better , presents us with a
big temptation to go straight from acknowledging the failure to analyzing
it.11
But don’ t. Grieving a failure is a dif ferent process from analyzing it.
Grieving a failure is an emotional process, one of acceptance. “This
happened.” We move through the grief not by asking why this happened or
figuring out how it could have been prevented. Yes, after the grief, you will
analyze the failure and learn from it, but that analysis is an intellectual
process, not an emotional one.
“This is a particularly common trap for type As, who might tend to
view grief/mourning failure as weakness—and I speak from personal
experience,” explains technologist and entrepreneur Safi Bahcall. *
So how does one grieve for a failure? Depending on the emotional
impact of the particular failure, it could be as simple as taking a few
moments to acknowledge the disappointment, all the way to a full-blown
mourning process. Dr . Dahlkoetter recommends to her athletes, as we do
with our clients, that they write down their thoughts and feelings. They need
to express their anger , whether it’ s at themselves or at someone else (for
instance, a relay teammate who dropped the baton).
Here are some ways she helps Olympians handle failure:
Put things in perspective. Look back ten years from now . How
much will it matter then?
Focus on behavior , not outcome. Find something they did right.
Did they keep good form, for example?
When we fail, we’re often asking negative questions, usually
starting with “Why?”—including “Why am I an idiot?” That
fires up the inner critic. Positive questions start with “What” or
“How .” What can I learn from this experience? What’ s good
about what just happened? How can I use this situation to my
advantage? What’ s the next step? How can I keep moving
forward? What tools and resources do I need to keep moving
forward?

--- PAGE 163 ---
To get closure on a failure, neuroscientist Richard Wiseman suggests a
three-step process we firmly approve of:
1. Write it down: pour out onto paper everything that’ s on your
mind, everything that weighs on your heart. What happened,
how you felt—this is a mental pur ge, or as some of our clients
call it, a “vomit sprint.”
2. Rip it up: with gusto and enthusiasm. Really get into the
motions, hear the ripping, feel the tearing.
3. Burn it, if you can, and of ficially declare the failure closed.
Reframing Using Social Pr oof
Ever notice how when one person starts dancing, they look like a maniac,
but when twenty people start dancing, we assume it’ s Improv Everywhere?
Another kind of reframing uses the aforementioned social proof
principle: finding admired figures who have failed, are willing to fail again,
and who, in fact, integrate failure as an expected part of their process. The
fact that an admired authority figure approves of failure (or whichever
experience you want to destigmatize) makes it “all right.”
Anyone who has never made a mistake has never tried anything new .
—Albert Einstein
Try to find at least five examples of failure. The human brain thinks in
triads (from Olympic medals to fairy tales, it’ s three medals, three princes,
three bears), and it cannot immediately comprehend numbers greater than
four.12 Past that number , the mind turns the number into “a lot” or , in this
case, “everybody .”
You can pick these examples from anywhere. Celebrities and peers will
hit the social proof lever; authority figures will hit the authority lever . For
best results, include all the dif ferent ways we absorb information: radio and
podcast interviews, YouTube videos, books, letters, e-mails—find in any of
these media examples of people talking about their failures. You want to
bathe in that environment so that your brain gets the impression that the
world around you thinks in this manner .

--- PAGE 164 ---
For example, you could remind yourself that almost every successful
innovative person, just like Edison, integrates failure as a necessary part of
their process.13 You could tell yourself that failure is such an inherent part
of innovation that Edison distrusted innovation without failure. In fact,
when he first listened to the playback of his recorded voice on his
phonograph he was worried. “I was always afraid of things that worked the
first time.”
Safi Bahcall recalls a quote from golfer Michelle Wie’s coach, who
instructed her to repeat to herself whenever she missed a putt: “I’ve gotten
that out of the way . Now I’m one step closer to becoming the best putter in
the history of golf.” “I often think of that quote when I screw up,” says
Bahcall.
As Andy Ouderkirk, corporate scientist at 3M, told us: “Self-doubt is a
natural part of breakthrough innovation, and there is usually little
affirmation from others early in the process. Understand that self-doubt
suggests that you are indeed likely working on a breakthrough idea. If you
have doubts, others probably do as well, which is probably why the
opportunity for a breakthrough still exists. I’ve learned that inventions that
create little skepticism at the onset almost never end up being very useful.
The ones that were most challenged led to the lar gest businesses. I now put
much more ener gy into the inventions that create skepticism!”14
You could one day learn to see that feeling of doubt as a reassuring one,
a sign that you’re on the right track. Doubt is a signpost on the road to
something new , a natural part of the journey to a breakthrough. If no one
had doubts, they’d all have done it already!
And, of course, you can combine social proof reframing with pure
cognitive reframing. Edison is said to have failed ten thousand times on his
way to inventing the commercially viable lightbulb. When asked how he
could persevere through a thousand failures, he answered that he didn’ t see
it as “a thousand failures.”15 Instead, he had simply found a thousand ways
to not invent this lightbulb. Eventually , the commercial lightbulb was
invented.
If this had been phrased as: “Edison determined, from a comprehensive
search of materials and conditions in over ten thousand trials, an

--- PAGE 165 ---
experimentally refined construction of the lightbulb,” the perception of
those unsuccessful trials changes instantly .
The rephrasing of ten thousand failures as ten thousand trials is
cognitive reframe. The fact that this sentence was said by Edison? That’ s
social proof.
A Special Note for Those of You Who Lead T eams and Organizations
This is where you play a critical role as leaders. Because as leaders, people
turn to you to understand how they should feel about something. As leaders,
you are by definition the alphas of your pack. People will look to you for
cues as to how they should view events and react to situations.
If you can tell them what to expect, how their brain will react to failure,
which emotions they might feel, and what pitfalls to watch out for , they
won’ t be as unsettled when it happens.
Why was Edison able to stay confident and focused after his first
failure? It was six years between the debacle of his voting machine and the
success of his broadband telegraph. That’ s six years of concepts not
working. Six years of failure. But to Edison’ s way of thinking, “If I find
10,000 ways something won’ t work, I haven’ t failed. I am not discouraged,
because every wrong attempt discarded is a step forward.”
Practice Failur e
Under duress, we seldom rise to our level of expectation. Instead, we fall back to our level
of training. This is why we train.
—Army motto
When you go to the gym, you don’ t immediately pick up the 300-pound
barbells. You work your way up to them. Practice is trying out a new
behavior in a low-stakes scenario, a safe environment; it is trying out a
much smaller version of that behavior , a baby step. This is precisely what
you need to do with failure: practice it in low-stakes, safe scenarios, to
gradually increase your ability to handle it.
There are two kinds of practice: physical and mental. Physical practice
is the one most people think of first: actually experiencing something in real

--- PAGE 166 ---
life. Mental practice is going through whatever experience you’re practicing
—in your head.
We’ll cover real-life, experiential practice first.
Experiential Practice
All the tools we cover in this section help you rewire your response to
failure, but they play on dif ferent mechanisms to get there. Some modes of
reframing, such as cognitive behavioral therapy , are purely a logical,
cognitive assertion; the EN is at work here.
Others, such as social proof, are more emotional. It is an instinctive
response to an observed social behavior , whether or not one understands
any logic behind it. When a train stops and everyone gets out and starts
going in the same direction, you will instinctively go with the flow , move
with the herd. Social proof can work even when the behavior that is
approved of doesn’ t make sense—such as when an admired or authority
figure models an illogical behavior .
Now , there is a dif ference between failing in private and failing in
public. There are, in fact, a few stages on that spectrum: being all alone,
being with a small group of friends where you feel safe, being with
strangers, and being the center of a lar ge group. You don’ t want to start with
karaoke right of f the bat! Get to know your own personal reactions to
failure in a safe environment, where you are practicing failure, so that they
won’ t take you by surprise when a real failure happens.
We’re going to cover a few dif ferent ways of practicing failure.
Sports
Sports are a fantastic way to practice failure, and thus build resiliency to
failure. Smart companies recognize it and make the most of it. Google, for
example, knows that their employees must experience frequent failures on
the road to breakthrough innovation, so they specifically seek people with a
high resiliency to failure.
One of the Google recruiters described interviewing a candidate who
used to play professional baseball, and who told him: “I know how to fail.
I’ve struck out a million times. Literally .” He hired him on the spot.

--- PAGE 167 ---
Another Google executive told us: “I have a few baseball players on my
team. They’re all successful.”
Poker
Poker is a phenomenal training ground for handling failure. Poker players
have to accept that they’re going to lose a certain percentage of the time.
World Series of Poker winner Annie Duke says, “It has to be okay to lose,
because losing will happen,” no matter how good you are.16
Poker can help you learn how to bounce back from a failure. “Y ou can’ t
analyze or ruminate in the moment; that’ s not the time for it. You have  to
snap out of it because the next hand is coming up, and if you’re still angry
at fate, others, or yourself, you’re going to play the next hand poorly . Tell
yourself that you’ll put a pin in it and analyze it later .”
Annie explained that in poker when you analyze your decision after the
fact you are not looking at whether you won or lost. Whether you win any
particular hand in poker is very random. There are just so many things you
don’t know . You analyze your decision to see whether you understood the
odds and probable outcomes as well as you could have, and whether you
made the right decision according to this understanding.
Cooking
Cooking is especially useful because you get to practice failure and
creativity at the same time. Neuroscientist Marie Pasinski is a big fan of this
kind of experiential practice, and recommends The Blue Strawberry
Cookbook,  a cookbook without recipes that encourages you to be innovative
and experiment. Cooking is also where Olivia practices failure.
Olivia’ s kitchen often looks like a crime scene—after particularly
creative experiments, there is food everywhere, including the walls. She
firmly believes that the amount of creativity generated is in direct
proportion to the amount of mess made, and the word most often heard in
her kitchen is “Whoops!” She once decided to “improve” tzatziki, a Greek
yogurt and dill dish, with oranges and salami. She insists that she was doing
fine until she added the salami. Thankfully , Olivia’ s black Labrador is
always happy to eat what might dismay a less open-minded eater .

--- PAGE 168 ---
Here are two failure practices for you to try at home. Pick whichever
appeals to you more.
Limited r esour ce cooking  allows you to practice both diver gent and
conver gent thinking.
How could you make a dessert with just what you have in your
kitchen right now? It doesn’ t have to be delicious, just edible and
dessertlike. Seriously , take the time to think about it. Feel that
struggle in your brain? That’ s neuroplasticity at work.
Now open your fridge. What main course could you make with
only what is in the fridge?
And now , considering everything in your kitchen, could you
make pancakes, or something that vaguely resembles pancakes?
Let’s say all you have is a few unripe bananas. Here’ s what you
can do: roast the bananas in the oven until they’re black outside
to speed-ripen (this is like turbochar ging ripening). Mash the
bananas. Heat frying pan, and use the mashed bananas as you
would pancake batter . Wait until it’ s well caramelized before
flipping. Enjoy .
Deliberate failur e cooking  encourages you to deliberately do
something “wrong” to gain possible new insights. For instance, baking
cookies at the wrong temperature ended up giving us soft-baked cookies.
Eric Maisel gives this exercise: Make an omelet with three eggs, but drop
the eggshells into the pan with the eggs. Carefully put the omelet on a plate.
Look at it. You’ve made an omelet that is a failure. Or is it? Isn’ t it pretty
interesting, with a funny pattern of crispy shells sticking out? Bet you’ve
never seen an omelet like that before! Didn’ t you feel dif ferent, slightly
taboo, as you dropped your eggshells in the pan, wondering what would
happen? Won’t you remember this omelet while you for get all of the boring
normal ones you’ve made a hundred times?

--- PAGE 169 ---
Impr ovisational Theater
Improvisational theater , commonly known as “improv ,” has been
discovered to be an excellent leadership tool in recent years. Young leaders
at some of the best business schools take classes on improv to help them
become more comfortable with going with the flow , working with what
people give them, trusting in the process of collaboration.
The practice of improv is like performing a play while the entire cast is
walking on tightropes. There are no lines, stories, or anything even
rehearsed. The actors are given a concept or a situation, such as “at a
dentist’ s office,” and then they start making it up, improvising. It is not
easy. You have to take your cues from the other actors, build on what
they’re doing, and add your own ideas to the mix, all while trying to tell a
coherent, and often funny , story . Failure is inevitable and expected.
Throughout your failure practice, it’ s really important to focus on the
behavior , not the outcome. Dahlkoetter phrases it this way: “Focus on
process  goals rather than outcome  goals.”
Olympic coach Charlie Brown explains: “Outcome goals or
‘performance goals’  compare you against someone else. They are useful as
aspirational goals, but you can’ t control whether they happen or not. And
you want to focus on what you can control. Performance goals compare you
to a preset standard. The problem is that this assumes specific (optimal)
conditions, and you don’ t control those, either .”
Process goals focus on the things that are under your control, which
could be behaviors or mental processes. Just as we’ve told you that we can’ t
guarantee breakthrough, but we can tell you how to maximize your chances
of getting there, process goals help you maximize your chances of success
in whatever you are trying to achieve.
Mental Practice
Now that you have some tools for experiential practice, let’ s talk about
mental practice. The ef fectiveness of mental practice has been extensively
studied, and mental practice is now an absolute requirement for world-class
athletic training. Every single one of the Olympic coaches we interviewed
spent at least half the interview on mental practice, and one of them told us:

--- PAGE 170 ---
“I doubt you could find any Olympian who doesn’ t incorporate mental
practice into his or her training.” In fact, one Olympian even said: “Once
you get to a certain level, it’ s all in the mind.”
When we say “practice failure,” what we really mean is practice your
response to failure. You can’ t control the circumstances, you can’ t control
the outcome, but you can control your response to the outcome. And that
means changing the way you view failure, which really means changing the
way your brain reacts to failure, changing the failure-response wiring in
your brain. Changing your mind is rewiring your mind; every time you
change your mind you are literally changing a response wiring in your
brain. Hello, neuroplasticity .
Mental practice, which is also called mental rehearsal or visualization,
is an elite tool for all high performers, from athletes to musicians to the U.S.
Army Special Forces. Mental rehearsal is one of the many ways to rewire
one’s brain. Any time you think a thought, you are either creating a new
physical connection or strengthening an existing one. By rehearsing a
different reaction to failure, you wire and then strengthen the circuits of the
new reaction.
Dr. Wes Sime has worked with many Olympic athletes and their
coaches. He told us of one dramatic example of the power of mental
practice he encountered when he was working with a young acrobatic diver .
Sime told us the story of a diver who hit the board on his way down and
hit the water so hard he fractured his cervical vertebrae. Out of physical
training for six weeks while his bones mended, the diver practiced mental
training. He imagined and went through the perfect dive. It was a relief for
the diver to continue to practice without risk of further physical injury .
Using neurofeedback, Wes taught the diver to quiet his mind and
achieve total focus on the task, to “stay in the zone,” as athletes often say .
Sime told us: “Neurofeedback turbochar ges mental training, because it
allows you to focus so deeply that the imagery sinks into your mind far
deeper .”
After six weeks of mental training, he was in a competition. Sime told
us: “Diving is such a precision sport. Usually , in competition, we get five
perfect dives, two or three respectable dives, and the rest is a wash. Yet here
was this kid, after six weeks out of the water , his first time back after an
injury , and every single one  of his dives was perfect.”

--- PAGE 171 ---
Here are a few guidelines on how to get the most out of visualization.
Live the moment.
When pole-vaulters practice mental rehearsal, they practice every step
of their run, planting the pole, feeling the air rushing about them. Legendary
swimmer Michael Phelps has practiced his strokes every single night just
before bedtime since he was twelve years old. He would imagine the feel of
the water on his skin, the air in his nostrils, the tension of his muscles, and
the torsion of his body as he completed his flip turns.
For best results, make sure that your rehearsals are in first person —
meaning that rather than seeing yourself from the outside, you see through
your own eyes, breathe through your own lungs. Remember to make it as
sensory rich as possible.
Focus on behaviors, not (just) outcomes.
We’re sometimes asked: “When is it constructive visualization, and
when is it just fantasy daydreaming, mental escapism?”
The dif ference between the two is somewhat akin to the dif ference
between helpful critique and destructive criticism. They’re both critical, but
with very dif ferent aims: Helpful critique focuses on the behaviors, the
elements that you can change or adapt to, and gives you a sense of
progression. Destructive criticism, on the other hand, leaves you feeling
defeated and discouraged. In the same way , constructive visualization is
focused on a specific behavior  that you want to perform at a specific time,
rather than just the outcome you’re hoping for .
If, for instance, you’re rehearsing an upcoming presentation, don’ t just
imagine the congratulations of your peers, the applause of the audience.
Instead, focus on how you will feel at each stage of your presentation, how
you will move, walk, talk, and breathe.
There are two exceptions, when you actually do want to spend time
visualizing the outcome: to help you make yourself believe that the goal is
actually possible, and to test how you feel about a possible outcome, to see
if that’ s really the outcome you want.

--- PAGE 172 ---
Rehearse all possible scenarios.
It is absolutely critical that your mental practice doesn’ t just include
imagining a win. You also need to imagine every possible thing that could
go wrong, and your ideal behavior in that scenario. Dr Dahlkoetter told us:
“Too many athletes spend all their time visualizing only the perfect
outcome, which rarely happens.” Instead, she has her athletes visualize
several action plans in an if-then scenario (“if this happens, I’ll do this”),
covering as many contingencies as possible.
Matthew Brady was a U.S. Army Special Ops aviator , a helicopter pilot flying for the
Army’ s elite Night Stalkers unit in Iraq and Afghanistan. Special Operations forces are the
ones who volunteer to step into the most dangerous situations.
Brady explained, “When the Army asks: ‘Who wants to go behind enemy lines? Oh—
and we have no idea what’ s waiting for you and we probably won’ t be able to send
support,’  these are the guys who raise their hands.”17
The team members would usually start with table-talk rehearsals—everyone sitting
around a table and talking things through. They would “what if” the mission: what might
happen, what might go wrong.
Then there were computer -based virtual simulations. Let’ s say Brady was going to fly a
mission through a valley in Afghanistan. He would send the coordinates of where he was
going back to Fort Campbell, and the “sims” teams there would build a computer -simulated
virtual terrain and send it back to Matt.
They would load this simulation into the flight simulator , essentially a box sitting on
hydraulics containing the exact replica of a helicopter cockpit. The “windows” are screens
showing a virtual reconstruction of the terrain in which the mission will take place.
Brady would virtually fly through the simulated valley and land on the same mountain
peak half a dozen times in the hours before the actual mission. He would add variables to
the mission, such as poor weather conditions. Thanks to these rehearsals, by the time he
actually went on a mission, he felt as if he’d already flown the course multiple times. In
many cases, he told us, these rehearsals saved his life.
Brady recalled one particular instance, flying into a remote part of the Hindu Kush
Mountains in Afghanistan on a dark, moonless night. The pilots depended entirely on night
vision goggles to be able to see anything. The two helicopters were going in to pick up a
Special Forces team they had dropped of f the night before, and take the team back to base.
They were flying down a corridor of mountains, with 12,000-foot peaks on either side of
them.
The lead helicopter aimed for the landing while Brady held back. The terrain was so
rugged that, as the lead helicopter descended, an outcropping protruding from the side of
the mountain pushed the hydraulic actuators in the rear of the helicopter through a fuel line
and cut of f fuel to the right engine. At 9,000 feet, they couldn’ t maintain altitude with just
one engine, so with the engine cut they plummeted downwards. It was a huge explosion,
and worse yet, the ammunition started going of f.

--- PAGE 173 ---
Somehow , miraculously , no one was hurt. But the light from the explosion came
barreling down the mountain corridor and blinded Brady and his copilot through their night
vision goggles. “A  massive fireball, on a zero illumination night, in the middle of a hallway
of mountains, wearing night vision goggles, kinda looks like the Apocalypse, only
brighter .” Flying blind, Brady had to maintain a holding pattern at 9,000 feet.
“When you want to hold your position in a helicopter , it’s more ef ficient to fly in a very
small circle or a figure-eight pattern than to stay stationary because of the power required to
perform a stationary high hover . At our altitude, it was not only more ef ficient, it was
absolutely necessary . Had we tried to hold stationary , we would have dropped like a stone,
and there was nowhere to land for about five or six miles.” Altitude makes the air thin and
the air pressure low . Helicopters can’ t hover in low-pressure air; the back rotor goes out and
the helicopter goes into an uncontrollable spin.
Imagine trying to fly a helicopter in a figure-eight pattern, inside a narrow valley , with
jagged rock on either side. And now imagine doing all that blindfolded, knowing that if you
err even by a few yards, you will slam into the rock, crash, and die.
“So we performed a small figure-eight pattern while sorting through the possible ‘what
if’ scenarios. This also allowed our night vision goggles, and our eyes, a chance to
recalibrate when facing away from the fireball.” It was only their rehearsal of flying
through the terrain that made it possible.
“We didn’ t know what had happened. Were they shot down? Was it mechanical failure?
Was the team compromised?” One thing they did know was that it was almost daylight, and
in daylight you can be seen and shot at. They were running out of time: dawn meant you
had to be out of there.
So they flew to an intermediate base about five miles back, landed, and “talked it
through” all over again. They learned from intercepted Taliban radio chatter that, because
the Army had been firing artillery into the surrounding mountains that night, the helicopter
crash was assumed by the enemy to be just another shell.
Since the Taliban didn’ t know the team was on the mountaintop, Brady and his copilot
decided they could af ford to wait and come back the next night. In situations like these,
Special Forces joke that the stranded team would just have to sit and roast marshmallows.
Brady flew back to the Bagram Airbase to “reset” his crews and equipment (prepare for
the next flight). The next night, they successfully returned and picked up every member of
the team. “Because we had flown virtually before, we felt we would be able to solve it. And
we did. And it was because we had tried it before.”
Playing out what-ifs, hypothetical scenarios, while your fellow soldiers have just crash-
landed and are stranded on a mountaintop in enemy territory might seem a little cold. But
Brady explained that’ s what helped him stay focused in the midst of overwhelming
uncertainty . “We didn’ t think of it personally . We thought of it like a puzzle, more
clinically . That helped us deal with it.” This is where tools like detaching that we covered
earlier can be useful.
While most of us will never fly night missions into the Afghan mountains or have
virtual terrains created for us, we also won’ t be put in situations that might get us killed.
That means we can rehearse by having actual experiences.

--- PAGE 174 ---
Learning
We saw in the previous chapter that to develop his breakthrough vacuum,
James Dyson adopted the trial-and-error frame Edison used in his Menlo
Park research lab. Dyson would build a prototype, test it, analyze why it
failed, make corrections, then build another prototype. This makes complete
sense—you know you should learn from your failures. But how? Though
each failure (experiment! pivot!) is unique, here are a few guidelines that
may be helpful.
Don’ t Beat Yourself Up
You learn from a failure when you analyze and critique the decisions, the
process, or the behavior—but not the person who made those decisions or
engaged in that behavior . As Brené Brown puts it, there is a huge dif ference
between thinking “I’ve done something stupid” and thinking “I am stupid.”
Tina Seelig recommends that the very first thing to do after a failure is
to take a circus bow . “After a failure, just like a clown at a circus, throw
your arms in the air and announce ‘T a-daaaa!’  In this manner , you
acknowledge the failure but in a positive way .”
Ignore the Outcome (for Now)
“World-class poker players talk about the decisions they made, not the
outcomes,” says Annie Duke. These players know to focus on the things
they can control, which are the decisions they made, rather than the
outcome, which in poker is truly out of their hands.
What Duke means is that you shouldn’ t judge how good your decision
was based on the outcome of that decision, because you don’ t actually
control the outcome. In her case, she wants to know whether or not she’d
calculated the odds correctly . If, for example, she had correctly assessed
that she had a 70 percent chance of winning the pot if she stayed in the
game, and ended up losing, she doesn’ t take that to mean she was wrong to
stay in the game. Instead, she accepts that there was a 30 percent chance
that she would lose. The outcome doesn’ t invalidate her reasoning. “In
poker , it’s never a hundred percent certain,” she explains.

--- PAGE 175 ---
Learn to judge the success or failure not by the outcome, but by the
quality of the decisions made. “Y ou should only be as happy or sad as the
quality of the experiment you ran,” says Astro Teller, “independent of the
outcome. If you ran a smart, thoughtful experiment but got a bad result, you
still celebrate.”
“When you lose a hand, hindsight bias makes it very easy to feel you
were wrong. And when you get into that space, it can cause you to adjust
your play in very bad ways.” Annie told us that often, when you “called”
and lost, you actually were right to call, and you have to embrace that you
did all you could. “It was a good call whether I won the hand or not.”
Look Around  the Failure
Marie Curie discovered radium and polonium in the “imperfections,” the
dust surrounding two other elements that she was focusing on. Her Nobel
Prize truly emer ged from the dust, debris, and unwanted materials around
the uranium minerals that she had set out to study .
She also changed the world of physics forever . Up until the late
nineteenth century , the atom was still believed to be the smallest indivisible
unit of matter . People thought atoms could not break apart. Henri Becquerel
was starting to believe this was not true. But it was Marie Curie who blew
the lid of f the theory . Coming of f William Roentgen’ s work with X-rays,
Curie began working with the newly discovered phenomenon of
radioactivity . Some elements gave of f ener gy. The question was how . Curie
was the first one to realize that it was a physical phenomenon, not a
chemical one. Atoms were physically falling apart and releasing ener gy.
Curie conceived of an experiment to prove this and performed the
experiment. As a nuclear chemist who works at Curie’ s original lab put it:
“While many others were battling in the jungle of odd and unexplained
phenomena, she was the first to climb to the top of a tall tree, look around,
and shout ‘W rong jungle!’  or rather ‘This is not the jungle in which we
thought we had landed!’”
Curie ushered in the age of atomic physics and quantum mechanics.

--- PAGE 176 ---
Get Feedback
Go see people whose opinion you respect: one or a few people in your field,
such as mentors or colleagues, and a few outside of your field.
To avoid your feedback source being tainted by hindsight bias, you can
use the poker mindset Annie Duke revealed earlier: “When world-class
poker players talk to one another for help analyzing a play , you never hear
them talk about the outcome. Instead, they lay out situations, all the factors
they were aware of, and they ask for feedback on each of their decisions,
turn by turn. It’ s not until they have gone through the entire chain of events
and received feedback on each decision that they reveal the outcome.”
You can do the same thing with the people you ask for feedback. Rather
than starting with the outcome, describe the situation as you understood it,
the variables, and what decisions you made at each point. Ask them what
they would have done. Mention a few of the alternative options you’ve
thought up and see what they say . And only when you’ve received feedback
on each intermediary step and decision should you tell them how it ended
up.
“If you win, it’ s not luck, it’ s included in the math. And if you lose, it
was also included in the math, and you have to accept that, because losing
will happen a certain percent of the time.” There will be times, as Annie
Duke explained, when you will have made every decision correctly and still
lose or fail. That’ s the math.
Now that you’re familiar with all the tools needed to handle failure,
here’ s how they all come together in a blueprint:
Putting It into Practice: The Failure Blueprint
Reframe failure—learn to see it as an essential part of the breakthrough process.
Practice failure:
Experientially: sports, poker , cooking, etc.
Mentally: rehearsals and visualization.
During failure, use self-for giveness and self-compassion to quiet your fight-or -flight
response.
Learn from the failure:

--- PAGE 177 ---
Don’ t beat yourself up.
Ignore the outcome (for now).
Deconstruct the process.
Look around the failure.
Go see other people.
Write up your post-mortem.
Knowing that there actually is a “right” way to fail helps talk back to:
The inner critic: “W e were following the Failure Blueprint.”
The impostor syndrome: “Maybe we’re an impostor , but we have a blueprint to
follow that will help us do things right.”
The perfectionist: “W e’re perfectly following the blueprint. It just so happens
the blueprint calls for imperfection and failure.”
The maximizer: “This is the way to get the most out of the process.”
KEY  TAKEA WAYS
The internal experience of failure is one of shame, dismay ,
disappointment, or even despair .
Failure skills ensure you are always in learning mode so you can
rebound and keep going.
Reframing helps turn our failures into learning opportunities. There
is cognitive reframing, which is rational and logical, and social
proof reframing, reminding yourself that lots of people have been in
the same situation.
Detaching from the emotions and thoughts around failure helps
create perspective.
Learn to handle negative thoughts. Don’ t repress them, or they will
grow stronger .
We react to failure like we react to grief.
Practice failure both mentally and physically .
Visualization, or mental practice, is a powerful tool in controlling
your response to failure.
Learn to judge success and failure not by the outcome but by the
quality of the decisions made.
Get and give feedback to others.

--- PAGE 178 ---
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 179 ---
Chapter 9
                  
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 180 ---
Icy Uncertainty
Accepting the Unknown
HAVE YOU EVER had the awful feeling that you’re just waiting for the other
shoe to drop, and finding sometimes that you’d rather have a negative
outcome than be left in suspense?
Imagine that you’ve landed in a foreign country , halfway around the
world. You’re shuf fling along in the customs line, feeling tired, grubby , jet-
lagged, and very unfamiliar with your surroundings. When the immigration
officer waves you up to his counter , you hand over your passport and try to
muster as friendly a hello as you can.
The immigration of ficer takes a long look at you, then flips through the
pages of your passport. He turns back to the front. He looks at the photo,
looks at you, and back again. He reaches for the stamp, but as he does so,
he glances at his computer screen and freezes. Then he closes your passport
and says, “W ait here, please.” You watch him walk of f, your passport in his
hand.
Now , you know  you’re not a terrorist, drug smuggler , or international
art thief. * But still—your heart rate increases, adrenaline sur ges through
your veins, and you suddenly feel wide awake and seriously anxious.
What happened?
Did the immigration of ficer see something on the screen? Had you been
flagged for some reason? Perhaps it’ s a mistake, maybe someone with a
similar name. You wonder if you’ll be detained for hours.
Your mind starts spinning all sorts of scenarios, and as you stand there
the anxiety becomes so unbearable that you almost wish the immigration
officer would reappear even with bad news, anything but this complete
uncertainty .
Now imagine that the immigration of ficer, after looking at your
passport, says, “I’m having a problem with my reader . Can you hold on
while I go check this with my colleagues? It won’ t take more than a

--- PAGE 181 ---
minute.” In this case you might tune out, take out your phone, start playing
Candy Crush, and wait patiently .
The only dif ference in these two scenarios? The level of uncertainty
about what was going on and what was going to happen.
We all have dif ferent comfort levels when it comes to uncertainty . Each
of us has a range, a comfort zone, below which things seem too predictable
and life feels boring, and above which things feel unsettling, overwhelming,
and confusing. At the extreme of the uncertainty spectrum, you get chaos—
total unpredictability .
Interestingly , Chaos  is the name of the vale from which the Titans,
creators of the universe, arose. Does more uncertainty equal more
creativity? Yes, in a way . In fact, as we’re about to see, the ability to handle
uncertainty is absolutely critical to the breakthrough process.
Uncertainty , just like failure, is an unavoidable part of life. In fact,
considering the ever -increasing pace of business and technological
advances, as well as ever -present unforeseeable economic upheavals,
uncertainty will always be a part of our daily lives. As business guru Alan
Weiss puts it, “The environment is changing on an hourly basis. This
morning’ s strategy may not work by lunchtime.”
The inability to tolerate uncertainty carries multiple costs, such as
leading us to make premature decisions. Too often, people feel so
uncomfortable being uncertain that they’re willing to do anything to get
themselves out of that state. They’ll make a decision before all the elements
are in place, or perhaps they’ll kill projects too early because it felt too
uncomfortable to let things unfold.
In fact, not being able to handle uncertainty is a real breakthrough
blocker . The ability to handle uncertainty is particularly important for
innovation breakthroughs. Just like with failure, if you’re not willing to do
things that have uncertain outcomes, you’ll only do things that have a
guarantee of success, which means things that are already known and, by
definition, not innovative.
The very nature of breakthrough innovation is stepping into uncharted
territory: we don’ t know where we are, where we’re going, or how we’re
going to get there. Innovation requires allowing for a certain degree of
uncertainty . In fact, uncertainty is so fundamental to innovation that most

--- PAGE 182 ---
companies would see a measurable increase in innovation just by increasing
people’ s comfort with uncertainty .
Discomfort with uncertainty can also catch us in sneakier ways.
Sometimes, when you’re experiencing more uncertainty than you’re
comfortable with, your verbal processor (often called the “confabulator” by
neuroscientists) will construct a story or a reason in order to create a sense
of certainty instead.
This story becomes a frame through which you see the rest of the
experience, which can be limiting: the confabulator tempts us with a feeling
of certainty , but its ef fect is a bit like putting blinders on a horse. You only
see a narrow frame.
The frustrating thing about a breakthrough? Until it happens, you don’ t
know how close you are. Until you break through the surface, not one ray
of light—and then all of a sudden, illumination. But you have to be willing
to stay with the process the whole way through, not knowing how long it
will take for the breakthrough to appear .
Why Is It So Uncomfortable?
Uncertainty is uncomfortable for most of us. In fact, it is physically
uncomfortable for the human brain: it registers in the brain just like pain,
activating the amygdala in the same way .
Our natural discomfort with uncertainty is a legacy of our survival
instincts. We tend to be more comfortable with what is familiar , since it
obviously hasn’ t killed us yet. The unknown could be dangerous, and we’d
better find out if it is. Though you were far from a life-threatening situation
when you were left alone in the customs line, the uncertainty your brain
experienced felt the same as the kind our ancestors evolved to avoid long
ago.
We crave certainty because it gives us the (often illusory) feeling of
control. And most of us love control. It makes us feel safe. Uncertainty , on
the other hand, is often caused by something outside of our control. In fact,
it almost always is unless the uncertainty is caused by indecision.
It’s also particularly hard for us today because we are living in an age of
answers. From the moment we start school, we are judged by and valued for

--- PAGE 183 ---
how much we know , how many answers we get right. Having an answer
provides certainty to a situation. Parents want to be able to answer their
children’ s questions; teachers want to be able to answer their students’
questions; scientists want to answer the riddles of nature. Nobody wants to
stand up in front of others and say “I don’ t know .”
But there is an interesting paradox in all of this. Although we get
rewarded by society for knowing answers, for playing our role in
establishing certainty , it’s actually when people say “I don’ t know ,” when
they step into not knowing and explore from there, that we move forward as
a society .
Breakthr oughs do not come fr om people who stand in the certainty
of their  answers, but fr om those who have the courage to stand in the
uncertainty of their  questions.
Those very answers that we use to score well on tests were discovered
by people who were willing to stand in a place of not knowing. The
breakthroughs that decode the world and give us answers only happen
because of the people who are willing to withstand uncertainty without
flinching and without blinking. They are willing to stand in uncertainty and
ask why . Without that, we’d have no answers at all.
Answers and questions are two sides of the same coin. Our scientists,
anthropologists, economists, philosophers, artists, mathematicians, and
innovators have created our world of answers by having the heart and
courage to live inside the questions.
In the nineteenth century , the British Empire owned half of all the
oceangoing vessels in the world. It was an incredibly lucrative position to
have in a world where oceans were the primary trade routes; but the British
also had to contend with the uncertainties of piracy , war , and the forces of
nature. To deal with pirates, they built the world’ s largest navy . To deal with
lost ships, they became the insurance center of the world.1
The tools we’re going to give you in this chapter serve essentially the
same purpose—protection and insurance—on a psychological level. Some
tools will help protect you from uncertainty . You’ll learn how to limit
uncertainty by “loading your certainty bucket,” and how to reduce
uncertainty by thinking like a poker player . You’ll also learn how to practice
uncertainty so you can be less af fected by it and handle it better as time

--- PAGE 184 ---
goes by . Other tools are like insurance. They help you neutralize uncertainty
that has reached an overwhelming level and risks creating uncreative
mental states.
You know why uncertainty can be uncomfortable and why it’ s
important to handle it well. Let’ s look at a few tools and exercises to help
you deal with it, perhaps even embrace it and make it work to your
advantage.
Balance Uncertainty
Everyone has an uncertainty threshold, above which their mind goes into
the fight-or -flight state. When we don’ t know where we are, where we’re
going, or how we’re going to get there, our natural reaction is to activate
our sympathetic nervous system, with all its unfortunate consequences.
We instinctively seek to remain below this uncertainty threshold. If
your uncertainty-handling capabilities are maxed out and you’re already
handling all the uncertainty you can, you’ll avoid adding any more
uncertainty elsewhere. This might be disastrous if you’re working on a
breakthrough, since uncertainty is vital for creativity . That’ s why it’ s worth
decreasing the uncertainty in areas where it’ s not necessary .
Imagine a scale with certainty in one bucket and uncertainty in the
other . If you want to be able to handle a heavier uncertainty load, you need
to equally load the certainty bucket to keep things in balance. What can you
load it with?
Returning to Old Favorites
There is a special kind of agony in the process of writing a book. Few of us
have ever made a substantial creative work that didn’ t have a series of
difficult stages. Feelings of being lost, disoriented, overwhelmed, and afraid
of the consequences are par for the course, and, paradoxically , often the
sign that one is getting into interesting territory .
One author we know finds herself instinctively turning to well-known
and well-loved books during her writing periods. What she is seeking in
them is the certainty of an enjoyable experience; there is no uncertainty

--- PAGE 185 ---
about what the experience of reading them will be like. The familiarity of
the phrases themselves has a comforting ef fect.
During the writing of her most recent book, she read Jane Austen’ s
Pride and Pr ejudice  eight times, cover -to-cover . “There was a reassurance,
grounding, and a comfort in reading the familiar phrases—every word
perfect, every sentence a delight,” she says.
Loading the Certainty Bucket
Gustave Flaubert’ s maxim was “Be regular and orderly in your life . . . so
that you may be violent and original in your work.”2 This sentiment is
echoed by a number of creatives; you would be surprised at how many
well-known artists, novelists, or designers use strict routines, rituals, and
schedules in all noncreative areas of their life.
Mason Currey , the aforementioned analyzer of the habits of nearly two
hundred of the world’ s most prolific inventors and innovators over the ages,
wrote: “A  solid routine fosters a well-worn groove for one’ s mental ener gies
and helps stave of f the tyranny of moods.”3
Many of the people Currey studied had established a standardized day
from the moment they opened their eyes to the moment they went to sleep,
seven days a week. Legendary choreographer Twyla Tharp, who has broken
every ballet choreography rule in the book, wakes up at the same time, has
the exact same breakfast, does the same gym workout, and so forth, through
every single moment of her day until she heads to bed. Immanuel Kant
went on daily walks that were so exact that people said you could set your
watch to them.
Having so much predictability in 90 percent of their days allows people
like Tharp to be wildly creative, going boldly into the uncertainty , in the 10
percent of their day when this creativity is key . If you want to handle
uncertainty in breakthrough areas, you must minimize uncertainty
everywhere else. By confining uncertainty to the areas where it is most
useful, you can maintain a consistent performance in all areas of your life.
This is where routines and rituals * come in. These are some of the most
effective tools you can use. They add predictability and reliability to your
life. They are grounding experiences you can count on, no matter what’ s
going on. Their consistency is what makes them ef fective: they provide a

--- PAGE 186 ---
kind of psychological bedrock, a way to load the certainty bucket and
provide a counterweight to uncertainty .
Human habits have been under much scrutiny lately , and the science of
habit formation is fascinating. You’ll find several excellent books on the
topic in the resources section of this book. B. J. Fogg, head of the Stanford
Persuasive Technology Lab, creator of the Tiny Habits method, considers
habit making a fundamental skill and one that should be taught in school,
“especially in the age of scattered distraction we live in.”
In addition, “Habits can permanently raise people’ s happiness
baseline,” happiness researcher Shawn Achor tell us. Even if you think you
have no discipline at all, you have more than you think. Everyone has some
routines that are good for them, such as brushing your teeth.
The Science of Habit Formation
If there’ s one thing we can learn from Mason Currey’ s research, it’ s that
there really is no single ritual, routine, or habit that will lead to generating
breakthroughs. The only two common threads are:
Chemicals: Alcohol, of course, but also every kind of drug one could
possibly imagine. Olivia was shocked to discover how many world-
famous mathematicians and scientists used amphetamines daily .
(“Poets, yes, writers, artists, perhaps; but not scientists, not physicists,
they’re supposed to be respectable  people!”) Judah has spent enough
time at Burning Man to have seen everyone, from priests to politicians,
under a variety of influences.
Daily walks: walking every day is a great ritual and serves a dual
purpose, loading the certainty bucket and giving you a good way to
access your breakthrough experience.
Yes, ideally you’d want all your rituals to serve this dual purpose. But
don’t get caught in the trap of thinking that all of them must do so: that’ s
your maximizer talking. Don’ t go chasing after “the best” rituals. If you do
something, that’ s enough to make it worth it.

--- PAGE 187 ---
Ideally , your rituals would allow you some change of pace from the rest
of your tasks. Performance researcher and author Tony Schwartz has found
that our brains become easily fatigued: they need breaks to be able to
refocus, create, and produce.
“When we don’ t give them the needed time to refuel,” he told us, “they
more or less start to shut down and ratchet up the crankiness until we have
to listen. By then, we’ve often spent hours at work without really
accomplishing a whole lot of actual work. When you don’ t give your brain
a chance to refuel, you lose creativity , cognitive function, productivity , and
you put yourself at risk of fear and anxiety .”4
Aim to have your rituals give you a break from what you were doing.
Your brain needs downtime; it can’ t stay at peak performance mode or any
other steady state throughout the day . It needs to alternate from high-
performance mode to low-performance mode, like a shark that needs to
keep swimming to stay alive.
Even just thirty seconds of any ritual to clear your head—whatever
works for you—can allow your brain to ramp down and thus get the
oscillation it needs to avoid a crash. And yes, we understand how busy your
days are, but don’ t tell us you can’ t take just thirty seconds at regular
intervals throughout the day .
Here are some tips to help you form workable routines, rituals, and
habits.
Start Small
Every single expert we interviewed about rituals was adamant about the
importance of starting small. Fogg’ s Tiny Habits method teaches people
habit formation by setting tiny goals to increase the likelihood of success.5
Not only does this give you the “small wins” that add up to a real sense of
confidence in your momentum, it also satisfies the basic human need for
completion we no longer get from our 24/7 jobs.
Olympic coach Charlie Brown says that more than anything else, our
confidence is based on whether or not we have achieved our goals. So set
smart goals: small goals you know you can achieve and that will build your
confidence.

--- PAGE 188 ---
Make your new habit easy . In fact, make it so easy it seems laughable.
If your aim is to floss regularly , for example, Fogg recommends you start
with the goal of flossing just one tooth. When you get to that stage, that’ s
when you know you’ve made it easy enough. One of our clients, after a
decade of meditation practice, decided to take a few months of f. As with
any other training or fitness program, it was all too easy to let things slip,
and soon these few months became a year , then two.
She assumed she should immediately return to her previous level of
practice: a full forty-five minutes of meditation every day . Somehow , there
was always an “excellent reason” to delay until the next day . She finally ,
begrudgingly , realized that she’d have to start small. Really  small. She
began with just two minutes. “It’ s really hard to ar gue that you can’ t take
two minutes in a whole day . From there, it was easier to tack on another
minute—‘Just another sixty seconds’—then five minutes, then ten, and so
forth.”
When Shawn started his research to determine which habits were most
conducive to creating happiness, he ended up with an Excel spreadsheet
fifteen habits long. “By day two, I was feeling overwhelmed, it was 2 P.M.
and I hadn’ t gotten anything done other than those happiness things. By day
three, I’d totally given up.” Nowadays, he recommends choosing only one
new habit at a time.
Get Specific
Translate tar get goals into specific behaviors. For instance, if you’re aiming
to exercise more, translate it into the necessary behaviors: go running every
morning, get a trampoline, and so forth. “Rituals,” Tony Schwartz told us,
“need precision to be ef fective: be very specific about the time, place, and
any other specific you can determine for the behavior you want to adopt.”
Find a T rigger
What will prompt the behavior? Some behaviors are natural (waking up).
Others you must design or determine (answering the phone). For our client,
the right trigger turned out to be having her meditation space set up in such
a way that she had to pass over it to get to her closet: it was impossible not
to see it.

--- PAGE 189 ---
Set Incentives
Tim Ferriss, author of the wildly successful The 4-Hour W orkweek , told us
that “When seeking to create new habits, new rituals, or achieving new
goals, people focus far too much on the mechanics when they should,
instead, focus on the incentives. Figure out the why, and the how will take
care of itself.” As he explained it, the mechanics are very attractive because
they seem like variables that can be endlessly tested with little ef fort.
For reinforcement, our meditating client used gold stars, but with a
loss-aversion twist: she would give herself the gold star befor e she started
the meditation, and if she didn’ t finish it, she had to take the gold star away .
Plan for Failure
Yes, really . Kelly McGonigal’ s research showed that predicting how and
when you might be tempted to break your vow increases the chances that
you will keep a resolution. When are you most likely to be tempted and
give in? What is most likely to distract you from your focus? What
justifications will your brain use to convince you to skip the new habit “just
this once”? Imagine yourself in that situation, what it will feel like, and
what you will be thinking. Look at how a typical willpower failure unfolds.
Consider what specific actions would help. Then visualize success.
“Your rational self sets a course for you to follow , but often the tempted
self decides to change course at the last minute when presented with the
temptation,” says McGonigal. “The result will ultimately be self-sabotage.”
In The W illpower Instinct, she quotes behavioral economist Geor ge Ainslie
on this point: “T ake steps to predict and constrain that self as if it were
another person.”6 Study your tempted self; see what choices it makes and
organize things so you have the best chance of success.
Don’ t Rely on Willpower
McGonigal describes willpower , which is also called self-control, as a
muscle. When used, the muscle tires, and if you don’ t rest it, you can run
yourself into exhaustion. In fact, exerting willpower physically fatigues us.7
It is a finite resource, so be strategic about where and when you expend it.

--- PAGE 190 ---
What is absolutely critical to understand is that every single act of self-
control depletes willpower , whether you’re trying to stay calm, refuse a
cookie, or sit through a boring meeting. Anytime you have to fight an
impulse, filter out distractions, or make yourself do something dif ficult, you
use a little more of your willpower . This includes even trivial things, such
as choosing between twenty brands of laundry deter gent. Whenever you
have a decision to make, you’re using up your willpower reserves.
When our willpower tank hits empty , we revert to the path of least
resistance, or the default setting: that is, the way things are unless you
expend ener gy to change them.8
A fantastic study from Eric Johnson and Daniel Goldstein of Columbia
University’ s Center for Decision Sciences, published in the prestigious
journal Science  in 2003, revealed a striking dif ference among European
countries with regard to the rates of or gan donation consent.9 The contrast
was especially drastic between Germany (12 percent consent) and Austria
(99.98 percent consent) or between Denmark (4.25 percent) and Sweden
(85.9 percent).
Why would countries with very similar social and healthcare policies in
other respects be so drastically diver gent on this one issue? Because of one
simple, small dif ference. In Sweden, you are presumed to agree to or gan
donation unless you check the box to opt out. In Denmark, you have to opt
in: by default, you are presumed not to have consented to or gan donation
unless you take action to consent.
You’d think people would care pretty strongly about whether or not
their or gans will be removed from their body , but they don’ t. At least, not
enough to express a preference. In the vast majority of cases, people let the
default setting stand.
What you want to do is make it easy to go into the new behavior , and in
fact, to make it so easy that it becomes the default. The classic example is
putting your workout shoes and gym bag near the door .
Better yet, make it hard not to do it. If it’ s more ef fort not to do the
behavior you hope will become a habit, that’ s ideal. Make the old behavior
harder to do than the new one: one author dismantled his laptop to prevent
his tempted self from surfing the Internet to procrastinate. Another removed
the computer ’s wireless card and destroyed its Ethernet port.

--- PAGE 191 ---
You’ll have a much greater chance of success if you assume, when
you’re envisioning the new behavior , that the person in this situation is the
most tired, grumpy , exhausted, hungry , sleepy version of yourself. Better
yet, imagine a grumpy , tired kid. Stop trying to speak to the adult in you;
the adult (cortex/neocortex) is fully on board. Instead, focus on the less
rational, more primal brain parts, which are the ones that will resist the
change.
Tim Ferriss says he has succeeded, and continues to succeed, despite
himself rather than because  of himself. Known for his extreme
accomplishments in matters both physical (muscle mass, martial arts, tango)
and psychological (speed-reading, language learning), Ferriss explains that
most of his readers and viewers have a preconception of him as having a
will of iron and the self-discipline of a monk. In fact, he says, “I enjoy
frittering my time away as much as the next person. Self-discipline and
willpower are very overrated.”
Reduce Uncertainty: Think Like a Poker  Player
For Annie Duke, the key attribute that separates the best poker players from
the rest of the pack is that they embrace uncertainty . You can reduce
uncertainty , she explains, but once you have the percent range, you know
you’ll only be right a certain amount of time. “It’ s about how tight can you
get that range, and then accepting the fact that you can never know for
sure.”
Whether or not you realize it, you’re always living in probability
ranges. When professional poker players talk to one another , you’ll often
hear how that permeates the rest of their life.
When Duke’ s brother and brother -in-law (both professional poker
players) heard that she was going out on a date, they discussed the odds of
whether or not she and her date would get married: “I think it’ s two to one
they’re going to get married,” said her brother -in-law .*
“We do this with anything,” Duke reveals. “What’ s the probability a
table frees up in the next five minutes? What’ s the probability she’s just a
waitress? When you’re a poker player , you’re always thinking
probabilistically .”

--- PAGE 192 ---
Almost everything in Duke’ s life is expressed that way; it’ s just the way
she thinks. When she buys a Christmas present, such as the coat she
recently bought for her boyfriend, she includes the possibility that he might
not like it. If that’ s the case, she wouldn’ t feel hurt, because she knows it
was fifty-fifty . She was playing the odds, “setting a market” on the coat.
We strongly encourage you to read any of Annie’ s books, which you’ll
find in the resources section of this book, and to take her course. Executives
who have to make decisions in uncertain conditions would greatly benefit
from it.
Practice Uncertainty
Author Chris Germer explains that most people have a very low tolerance
for distress. The moment they begin to feel uncomfortable, they look for
anything to get rid of that feeling, quick! They try to find ways to soothe or
distract themselves, some helpful and healthy , some not.
At other times, they instinctively go to battle against unpleasant
emotions and try to suppress them, which unfortunately only makes matters
worse. As we’ve seen, suppress grief, and chronic depression may develop.
Struggling to fall asleep can keep you awake all night long. Waging a war
against our internal feelings is completely counterproductive. There’ s great
value in considering discomfort as a normal, unavoidable part of life.
Everyone, no matter who they are, no matter what they do, will experience
it. Often.
Accepting anxiety actually decreases anxiety , even in people with
chronic anxiety disorders. Paradoxically , people with generalized anxiety
disorder are freed from many of the limitations they’d been living with by
accepting these limitations and the chronic anxiety rather than fighting
against them.10
Meditation teacher Kenneth Folk recommends naming whatever
emotion you are experiencing, then adding “. . . and it’ s okay .” For instance,
you would say , “I’m feeling really anxious right now , and it’ s okay .” Try it
—out loud, if at all possible. It really works. Tara Brach of fers a variant on
this theme, adding “. . . and my life is very blessed.” As we’ve seen in the

--- PAGE 193 ---
gratitude section, your life really is very blessed, and you can start a nice
oxytocin brain wash by focusing on your innumerable blessings.
Just as we practiced failure, we can practice small steps of uncertainty
day by day . You can build tiny uncertainty into your day , every day , by
simply doing one thing dif ferent. This could be as simple as taking a
different route to work, reading a dif ferent newspaper , putting on the other
sock first.
Neuroscientist Marie Pasinski advocates that people “indulge in the
new” by making small changes in their daily routine as a way to stimulate
their brain and ultimately expand their intellectual horizons. “It’ s amazing
to me how new experiences have a way of snowballing,” Pasinski told us.
“You stop at a new venue to buy your morning cof fee and notice a flyer for
a gallery opening. You go to the opening and run into an old friend who
then invites you to join her book club. Never underestimate the power of a
single action.”11
Go to the Movies
Choose a mystery or thriller and make it a good one: check the reviews and
blogs, or be old-fashioned and get a recommendation from a trusted friend.
Ideally , come at it “blind”—know as little as possible what it’ s about. Watch
the movie, but before the mystery is revealed, turn it of f.
And now , just be still. Sit with whatever emotions, feelings, and
sensations arise. You don’ t know what’ s going to happen. Do you feel
unsettled, as if you had an itch you can’ t scratch? Do you have a desire to
move, to eat, to drink, to talk to someone? How is your mind reacting? Are
you playing out the possibilities in your head? Notice how your body is
responding to the uncertainty . Where are most of the sensations located?
What kind are they? Pressure, tightness, constriction, tingling?
It’s really dif ficult to simply stay with whatever discomfort or dif ficulty
you’re experiencing at the moment. Sometimes it’ s the hardest and most
courageous thing you can do, to just be with the feelings, thoughts, and
sensations, and let the moment roll in. There is such a strong ur ge to run
away from the experience of internal discomfort. Meditators sometimes
joke, when speaking of dif ficult emotions, “Don’ t just do something, sit
there!”

--- PAGE 194 ---
Or, as Franz Kafka put it: “Y ou need not leave your room. Remain
sitting at your table and listen. You need not even listen, simply wait, just
learn to become quiet, and still, and solitary .”12 This is wonderful advice.
Kafka, however , goes on to assure us: “The world will freely of fer itself to
you to be unmasked. It has no choice; it will roll in ecstasy at your feet.”
We wish.
Throughout this exercise, notice that none of your reactions have any
effect on the outcome.
Go to a Game
You can also experience uncertainty , and get comfortable with it, while
watching sports. Uncertainty is a big part of why sports are so enthralling to
us when we watch them in real time: we don’ t know the outcome. Here, the
uncertainty is exciting, and this is a great illustration of how uncertainty
isn’t always correlated with anxiety . Rather than being tied to anxious
apprehension, it can be tied to eager anticipation.
If you’ve ever heard someone say “the suspense is killing me,” that’ s
because, as we’ve seen, uncertainty registers in the brain as pain. Even
when it’ s in an overall pleasurable situation, we phrase it as something that
hurts. Watching sports is a great way to experience uncertainty in a safe
environment and to get comfortable with that sensation.
Choose any sport you like. Ideally , pick a game in which a playof f spot
or championship is on the line, as that will heighten the experience. As the
game or match progresses, delve into the sensations you are experiencing.
Notice how the uncertainty feels in your body .
Notice how you feel when your team is winning as opposed to when
your team is losing. How do the physical sensations change? How do your
behaviors change? Do you get up and walk around a lot? Do you wish the
game would be over already so you would just know and this discomfort in
your body could settle? Do you find yourself parsing the tiniest detail about
the players to try to gain insight into what will happen? Has the suspense,
the uncertainty , grabbed your entire attention? The desire to settle
uncertainty can do that.
And when the game is over , how do you feel? Elated your team won?
Sad that they lost? Either way , pay attention to how it feels to have the

--- PAGE 195 ---
uncertainty settled at last.
—
The purpose of these exercises is to help you detach from the sensations of
uncertainty , to view them objectively , just as you would any other physical
sensation, like hot or cold. This helps loosen the hold uncertainty has on
you. Knowing the feelings, physical sensations, and behaviors you tend
toward when coping with uncertainty can also alert you and help prevent a
premature action. Sometimes, we don’ t realize that we’re having trouble
with uncertainty , and we’ll take action before we realize that the decision is
motivated not by rational considerations but by an unconscious desire to
make the uncertainty end.
Neutralize Uncertainty: The Responsibility Transfer
The flip side of fear of uncertainty is the need for certainty . Imagine you’re
dealing with a dif ficult situation whose outcome is uncertain. You envision
a variety of ways it could play out, and you strategize how to best deal with
each. So far , so good. Once you’ve thought through each scenario, the
rational, reasonable, logical thing to do would be to put the situation out of
your mind and go about your day until action is actually required.
But how many of us have felt our minds going over the dif ferent
outcomes again and again, rehashing the various plans we’ve made,
replaying the possible scenarios, mentally rehearsing the upcoming
conversations, not once or twice, but ad nauseam? And all this because
we’re unable to rest comfortably in the uncertainty . At what point do we
declare this rehashing irrational?
How can we make the uncertainty less daunting, more comfortable? At
heart, most compulsive habits, whether of thought or of behavior , are a way
for people to feel safe and reassured, to feel they’ve done all they can to
stave of f the potential for failure.
When we’re worried about an uncertain situation, what we’re really
worried about is whether things will work out all right. If we could instill in
ourselves the belief that everything will work out well, for certain, we’d be
much more comfortable with not knowing exactly how that’ll happen.

--- PAGE 196 ---
One psychological tool Olivia developed over the years is called the
responsibility transfer . It helps people get more comfortable with
uncertainty and let go of their need for certainty , or rather find the certainty
they need in more helpful ways. We give a modified version of this tool to
all our clients, and many of them, from seasoned CEOs to starting students,
report how ef fective it is.
Putting It into Practice: The Responsibility Transfer
Sit comfortably or lie down, relax, and close your eyes.
Take two or three deep breaths. As you inhale, imagine drawing clean air toward the
top of your head. As you exhale, let that air whoosh through you, washing away all
worries and concerns.
Pick an entity—God, Fate, the universe, whatever may best suit your beliefs—you can
think of as benevolent.
Imagine lifting the weight of everything you’re concerned about—this meeting, this
interaction, this day—of f your shoulders and placing it on the shoulders of the entity
you’ve chosen. They’re in char ge now .
Visually lift it of f your shoulders and feel the dif ference as you are now no longer
responsible for the outcome of any of these things. Everything is taken care of. You can
sit back, relax, and enjoy whatever good you can find along the way .
After doing the responsibility transfer , many clients report feeling
lighter , or as if their chests opened up and expanded. If you don’ t feel any
physical reaction or mental relief when you try this exercise, it may simply
mean that uncertainty is not creating anxiety for you. If you do feel
something happen, fantastic—you’ve performed a responsibility transfer .
The next time you feel yourself considering alternative outcomes to a
situation, pay close attention. If your brain is going around in circles,
obsessing about possible outcomes, try a responsibility transfer to alleviate
some of the anxiety . Consider that there might be an all-powerful entity—
the universe, God, Fate—and entrust it with all the worries on your mind.
Over time, many of our clients have found themselves returning to this
technique so often that it becomes instinctive. With each practice, it

--- PAGE 197 ---
becomes easier to visualize, to transfer their everyday worries and cares,
and to enjoy the physiological ef fects of the transfer .
The reason this technique works is that, as you now know , when
presented with a scenario, our brain’ s first reaction is to consider it as
possible. William Bosl, former research scientist at the Harvard-MIT  Health
Sciences and Technology program, explains the implications of a recent
fMRI study on belief, disbelief, and uncertainty as follows.13
“Our brains are wired first to understand, then to believe, and last to
disbelieve. Since disbelief requires additional cognitive ef fort, we get the
physiological ef fects first. And, though this belief may last only a brief
moment, it’ s enough to produce an emotional and physical reassurance,
which can change our thought patterns as well as help alleviate the
uncomfortable feelings.”14
In other words, visuals bypass our slower cognitive circuits and go
straight to our brain’ s emotional centers, and our physiology responds well
before cognitive disbelief kicks in. By then, we’ve already gotten the
beneficial brain wash.
Uncertainty is not actually dispelled by the responsibility transfer; the
outcome remains uncertain. Instead, it makes the uncertainty less
uncomfortable. This distinction matters. People will go to great lengths to
get rid of the anxiety produced by uncertainty , which can lead them to make
premature decisions, to force bad outcomes, or to numb their anxiety with
state-altering substances of various kinds.
The responsibility transfer , on the other hand, works without trying to
negate uncertainty . Instead, it helps you to be less af fected by it, drawing
you out of the negative mental and physical states that often accompany a
position of not knowing. So though the outcome of your situation may still
be uncertain, you will no longer feel so anxious about it.
By presenting your mind with the possibility that responsibility has
been transferred, you’re putting to good use the wonderful placebo ef fect—
the brain’ s inability to distinguish between imagination and reality . The
placebo ef fect works even when we know we’re self-deceiving, perhaps
thanks to this natural cognitive delay in disbelief. A study conducted by the
Harvard Medical School suggests that deception may not be necessary for

--- PAGE 198 ---
the placebo ef fect to take hold; it may work its wonders even when people
know full well that they’re taking a placebo.15
KEY  TAKEA WAYS
Uncertainty is uncomfortable, but it’ s a necessary step in achieving
maximal creativity and reaching breakthroughs. Avoiding
uncertainty may reduce short-term anxiety , but it limits our
potential, leading to premature decisions and missed opportunities.
Uncertainty can be balanced with healthy habits, rituals, and
routines in other areas of our life.
When working to form a new , positive habit, start small. Define the
target habit or routine specifically and find a trigger to spur
consistency . Create incentives for yourself, but anticipate that some
level of failure will accompany the process.
Willpower isn’ t enough. When it comes to new habits, willpower is
a finite (and easily depleted) resource. We cannot rely on it alone to
achieve our new desired behavior . Create defaults to make your new
routine easy .
Practice uncertainty . There are ways to do this, including playing
games like poker , naming and accepting the uncertainty verbally , or
experiencing uncertainty in safe situations like at a movie or a
sporting event.
Use the responsibility transfer exercise to lessen the anxiety of
uncertainty . Uncertainty will remain, but the discomfort will be
reduced or even eliminated. Repeat the exercise as needed.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 199 ---
Chapter 10
                  
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 200 ---
The SuperTools
ORLÉANS, 1429. THE city has been under siege for five long months. The
French army , still reeling from their crushing defeat at Agincourt, is
demoralized, defeated, and by their own account, have lost all sense of
initiative. England and France have been at war for ninety-two years. And
Orléans is of such strategic importance that if it falls, the English regent is
likely to succeed in conquering all of France. Things are bad—really bad.
And that is when a sixteen-year -old illiterate peasant girl named Joan
changed the course of history .
Young Joan of Arc was burning with such a strong sense of purpose to
“kick the English out of France” that she left her father ’s farm in the small
village of Domrémy and made her way through embattled territories to the
French court of Chinon, where she gained an audience with the young
French prince and convinced him to send her at the head of a mission to
break the English siege of Orléans.
In the five months before Joan’ s arrival, the demoralized French army
had only made a single attempt to free Orléans. With Joan carrying their
banner into battle, they mounted three of fensives in five days, and freed the
city in nine. It was the first significant French success in fourteen years.
It is impossible to overstate just how extraordinary Joan’ s achievement
was. In medieval Europe, for an unmarried peasant girl to reach the French
court would already be remarkable. For her to gain an audience with the
prince was astounding. But for her to convince the future king of France to
send her at the head of his army is simply extraordinary .
Similarly , we cannot overstate the importance of a sense of purpose on
the road to breakthroughs. Knowing that you are working for a higher
purpose can be a source of strength when taking risks, trying again after a
failure, or quieting the voices inside that are telling you to give up.
A sense of higher purpose is the first of three SuperT ools we gathered in
this chapter . There are some tools that are more like practices than tools that
you can pull out at a moment’ s notice. Their ef fects are cumulative and

--- PAGE 201 ---
more powerful over time. We’ve chosen to call these SuperT ools because
they not only activate your brain’ s genius mode, but also break down
creativity blockers on a consistent basis.
SuperT ool #1: A Sense of Higher  Purpose
Now , you can have a sense of purpose that’ s not altruistic. A young sales
associate who feels that his purpose in life is to climb the ladder to CEO no
matter what it takes does have a purpose. It’ s just not one that will give him
the breakthrough power that an altruistic purpose would have.
All great innovators we spoke to had a sense that their work was going
to help all of humanity . They all seemed to share not only an immense
curiosity but also a desire to make things better for everyone.
Alfred Nobel’ s brother was killed at one of the family’ s factories in an
explosion involving nitroglycerin, a highly unstable compound. Nobel
became determined to find a way to stabilize the substance. He did, and
called it dynamite. And thus the Nobel Prize’ s founding father followed his
own higher purpose all the way to breakthrough innovation.1
Purpose tends to be externally focused. It is something that we do in the
world, to create a change, to help others, to make an impact. Purpose also
tends to come with a goal. Gandhi wanted to free India from British rule.
Joan of Arc wanted to free France, also from British rule. Jonas Salk, and
many others, wanted to save children from the scour ge of polio. This was
purpose—a drive to take action to achieve a goal.
The sense of purpose created Silicon Valley . The men, and at the time
only some women, inventing new technologies were often working for
companies developing systems with the U.S. government.2 They were
trying to win the Cold War. In other words, there was a deep purpose to
their work. Many of them had a core belief that what they were doing was
necessary and right. This emotional grounding in purpose is often found
where breakthrough innovation flourishes.
When you feel you’re on a mission, working for a higher purpose, that
this is your calling—what you’ve been born to do—then every one of your
faculties will go on hyperspeed. You’re lit with an inner fire, your brain is

--- PAGE 202 ---
firing on all cylinders. This is why Steve Jobs cast himself as a prophet, and
why charismatic leaders inspire measurably more breakthrough innovation.
Purpose T urns Your Work into a Mission
Feel the dif ference between “doing a project” and “being on a mission.”
Could Joan of Arc have inspired an army if she saw it as a “project”? The
sense that you’re on an important mission can help you do extraordinary
things. Joan’ s burning sense of purpose spread like an emotional wave
throughout the entire French army . They went from feeling like
demoralized losers to feeling divinely inspired. Joan’ s sense of higher
purpose turned a political war into a holy crusade.
Now , it doesn’ t have to be “your life’ s one true purpose.” We’re not
asking you to be Joan of Arc. We’re just saying that if you feel you’re
working toward a higher purpose, you’ll have far more breakthroughs.
“I’m not a risk-taker by nature,” says Meg Lowman, chief of science at
the legendary California Academy of Sciences.3 In fact, Meg was so shy
that she used to throw up before presentations. But she had a passion for the
undiscovered tree canopy of the Amazon jungle. And if she wanted to live
that passion, she had to take risks. It was the only way .
The first risks were social—going into what was at that time strictly a
man’ s world. Then the risks were physical—the safety equipment simply
didn’ t exist at that time, and wouldn’ t for quite some time. Meg’ s passion
for the canopy led her to sew herself a slingshot and design her own
walkway . “I was bumping into physical constraints,” she explains. “There
were no tools. I was forced to invent.”
Circumstances compelled her into self-reliance. So she took the risk
and survived, and with each risk she survived, she became a bit more
confident, and it became a bit easier to take the next risk.
A sense of purpose has many other benefits when it comes to
breakthrough thinking, strengthening our resolve as we face down a number
of daunting challenges. For instance, it makes you more resilient, more
focused, and better able to handle stress and make decisions. It is a
foundation to happiness—you’ll probably even live longer . For instance:

--- PAGE 203 ---
A sense of purpose helps navigate uncertainty . It gives you
something solid to cling to even when all else seems uncertain.
Though you may not know where you are in the process, or
what’ s going to happen, you know what you’re aiming for .
A sense of purpose increases self-confidence. It also decreases
the impostor syndrome and helps silence the inner critic. In fact,
it’s the single most ef fective tool we know after destigmatization.
We often ask clients who are feeling nervous about giving a
speech, What if you had the cure for cancer? What if it were your
God-given mission to bring this message to the world? Would
you still feel nervous?
A sense of purpose makes you healthier . Having a strong sense
of purpose in life may lower the likelihood of brain tissue
damage in older adults, new research suggests. When annual
psychological evaluations were stacked up against autopsy
results, the research team determined that men and women
characterized as having a strong sense of life purpose were 44
percent less likely to have suf fered major brain tissue damage.
“Having a sense of purpose,” concluded one of the study
coauthors, “will make a dif ference to your physical health.”4
Purpose-Finding Questions
We’ll cover several purpose-uncovering exercises, from quick questions to
intense visualization. Though none of these are guaranteed to show you a
purpose, they are all useful in helping you find the direction.
Make sure you’re in a quiet spot where you can think uninterruptedly
for a few minutes. Read the questions one by one, and take a break after
each question to let your mind wander .
1. What would you like to see written on your tombstone?
2. When your life is over , how would you like the world to be
different because you have lived?
3. Think of everything you are blessed with, every advantage you
have—whether material or immaterial, whether money , time,

--- PAGE 204 ---
knowledge, skills, or character traits. These gifts that have been
given to you—how have you used them in the service of others?
Putting It into Practice: Finding a Purpose at Your 100th Birthday
Gathering
Sit or lie down, close your eyes, and set the scene. Where is your gathering being held?
What day of the week, what time of day? What is the weather like? See the building
where the gathering is being held. See people arriving. Who’ s coming? What are they
wearing? Now move into the building and look around inside. Do you see flowers? If
so, smell the flowers’  scent heavy in the air . See people coming through the door ,
perhaps getting drinks at the bar or food at the buf fet. Imagine, perhaps, that everyone
is sitting around round tables filling the room. What kind of chairs are they sitting in?
What do these chairs feel like?
Someone taps on a glass to request attention, and announces that the toasts will begin.
Think of the people you care most about or whose opinions matter most to you. What
are they thinking? See them standing up one after another and delivering their message
for you or their stories about you. What are they saying? Do they mention
accomplishments? Regrets?
Now think: What would you like them to have said? What accomplishments would you
have liked them to mention, if any? What regrets do you have?
SuperT ool #2: Altruism
Imagine you’re in the middle of a really bad day . You had a big presentation
but because of technical issues you couldn’ t get your slides up on the
screen. You might have had time to fix the problem but you showed up late
because your daughter woke up sick and threw up on you. Changing your
clothes and waiting for your mother to get to the house to take care of your
daughter left you no time. You made it through your presentation as best
you could, then got back to your desk to find your project lead and design
lead in a shouting match. After separating them you decide to call it a day .
You’re in the elevator feeling sorry for yourself when it stops on the
fifth floor . You’re annoyed because you thought you were going to make it
to the lobby without a stop and you really don’ t want to see anyone. A
young woman makes her way into the elevator balancing six boxes in her

--- PAGE 205 ---
arms. She tries to hit the button for parking level 2 when two of the boxes
fall to the floor .
At first you’re just annoyed. Then you grudgingly say , “I got it.” You
press the button she missed and then pick the two boxes up of f the floor .
The young woman smiles and says, “Thank you so much.” Her thanks feels
good. It’ s the first good thing to happen all day . So you of fer to take a third
box from her and help her to her car . The young woman, smile widens and
she tells you how much she appreciates that. That people in this building
tend to be a little cold to one another and that your kindness is refreshing
and so helpful. As you help her to her car , the bad things in your day start to
lighten.
On the way she tells you that she doesn’ t like her job, they don’ t pay
well at all, and there’ s no one in the of fice near as nice as you are. As you
place the last box in her trunk she thanks you for making her day .
Imagine a tool that can:
Help you handle fear , the impostor syndrome, and the inner critic
Help you handle failure and make you more resilient to failure
Help you handle and navigate uncertainty
Boost your breakthrough council and increase creativity
Give your brain a great chemical wash
And as a bonus . . .
Make you happier and healthier
Increase your feelings of connectedness
Decrease your feelings of isolation and the risk of depression
And even make you more persuasive, more charismatic, more
attractive, and give you more satisfaction in life
Welcome to the wonders of altruism. Sounds a bit far -fetched? We
thought so too. While we were researching and writing this book, altruism
kept coming up again and again. We were rather uncomfortable writing
about altruism as one of the most powerful tools in a business book, and we
have to admit that we even tried to find ways around it. Unfortunately , the

--- PAGE 206 ---
evidence was overwhelming and backed by solid science. In fact, it showed
up so often we finally decided to gather it all in one place.
Altruism, like a sense of purpose, truly is a SuperT ool when it comes to
fostering breakthrough innovation. If engaged in consistently , it provides
insurance and protection against a number of major creativity blockers. For
instance:
Altruism provides a wonderful counterbalance to feelings of
failure, impostor syndrome, and the inner critic (“At least I’m
doing good”). Helping others tends to boost your own self-worth.
It also helps foster self-compassion, makes it easier to for give
yourself (you know your intentions were the best, you were
really trying), and brings up common humanity (a key part of
self-compassion).
Altruism helps you navigate uncertainty , first by providing some
certainty (“At least I know for sure I’m working for the greater
good”), and second by giving your brain a great oxytocin wash.
Altruism gets you out of your own head (where most of the
tailspins are happening) and more focused on the outside world.
With this broader focus, you’re more inclined to take the
perspective of others, and that alone increases diver gent thinking,
the biggest measure of creativity .
Adam Grant told us that “the necessity of others is the mother of
invention.”5 His research discovered that when people are in an altruistic
mood, they naturally become more creative, and produce ideas and products
that are judged to be more novel and useful by experts.
“Prosocial behavior ,” he told us, “makes you more open to others’
ideas, more willing to help, more driven to make the world better , less
focused on taking credit. It makes it easy for many voices to be heard in the
room. It makes it easy for people to share their ideas.”
Altruism increases creativity in many ways. First, by creating positive
emotions, it gives your brain the chemical wash that cleans away bad things
like stress and anxiety , replacing them with helpful neurochemicals that

--- PAGE 207 ---
enable broader focus, diver gent thinking, willingness to take risks, and all
the other components of creativity and innovation breakthroughs.
And if that weren’ t enough . . .
Altruism makes you healthier . “Altruism is good for our immune
system,” our science adviser Jon Lief f explained.
Altruism makes you happier . In fact, altruism is “the biggest
bang for your buck in terms of happiness,” as Adam Grant puts
it. It’ s also an equally powerful element of mental hygiene.
Altruism makes you more persuasive and charismatic. How? It
increases confidence. Knowing you’re doing good gives you a
feeling of ef ficacy , and that increases the power quotient of your
level of charisma. Of course, it also increases your level of
warmth. Can’ t get a date? Try altruism.
Last but not least, by increasing your self-confidence and enthusiasm,
altruism increases your level of persuasiveness, thus your ability to move an
idea through the or ganization and/or to make it happen.
Altruism in Practice
Altruism can be as simple as of fering to give someone a ride home, holding
a door open for a stranger , or letting someone go in front of you at the
market if you see they only have an item or two. Perhaps you stay late to
finish a project and let your coworker go home early to be with his newborn
baby . Or you let the harried man who is clearly in a hurry go in front of you
at airport security .
You can also perform a “random act of kindness,” such as paying the
toll for the car behind you or letting a car go in front of yours in a traffic
jam. Here’ s why these random acts of kindness are useful: If you expect an
external reward for altruism, you limit its ef fectiveness. But when you
perform an anonymous act and can imagine whatever recognition, reward,
or impact you want, you get the oxytocin boost that reciprocation would
have given you.

--- PAGE 208 ---
It’s worth noting that altruism won’ t yield its full benefits if it’ s
motivated by guilt or performed with an expectation of reward. To ferret out
whether or not you have a hidden expectation of reward, just ask yourself:
If I know that I’ll never get recognition for doing this, do I still want to do
it?
For best results, Grant recommended that altruistic activities be tailored
to the individual: “Either a cause they truly care about, or a use of their
signature strength, or ideally both. We can learn a lot by observing our own
past behaviors.” Looking back on your life, think about times when you
performed altruistic (or , as Grant would call them, prosocial) behaviors.
Which ones did you enjoy the most? From which ones did you get feedback
that you had impact?
“The mistake a lot of people make is that they try to be Mother Teresa
or Gandhi. And that’ s not sustainable for most of us.” In his research, Grant
focused on doing a lot of five-minute favors, and paid attention to which
ones ener gized him the most and which ones had the most impact.
Interestingly , this brings to mind Mother Teresa’ s philosophy of “doing
small things with great love.”
If you want the most ef fective altruism, look into impact philanthropy .
Impact Philanthropy
Until fairly recently , most philanthropists gave without much of a strategy
in mind. They gave because they felt obligated, or because they were giving
back, or to enhance their reputation, or because an issue had af fected them
personally . While (mostly) well intentioned, this kind of philanthropy’ s
effect has been spotty at best. But in recent decades there has been a big
breakthrough in philanthropy called impact-focused philanthropy . The idea
is to maximize social good by making the biggest dif ference with the capital
donated. It’ s doing good strategically , not just emotionally .
“Our obsession is impact; we provide unrestricted money to
organizations that have a scalable solution and a demonstrable ability to
deliver ,” says Kevin Starr , director of the Mulago Foundation.6
The Mulago Foundation is a private foundation focused on high-impact
philanthropy , and funds or ganizations that address the fundamental needs of
the very poor . This is an area of particular passion for Olivia, who is a

--- PAGE 209 ---
strong supporter of Mulago. “Frankly , it’s the biggest bang for your
philanthropic buck that I know of,” she often says. Any or ganization in their
portfolio has been rigorously evaluated or , in Olivia’ s words, “they do the
thorough due diligence so you don’ t have to.” Stroll through their portfolio,
pick one or ganization whose work you like, and donate. You’ll have a huge
impact, and the satisfaction of knowing for certain you’re having an impact.
Purpose + Altruism
If there’ s any magic formula, this is it.
Josh Balk vividly remembers the night of his first breakthrough. “I was
watching a documentary about the food industry ,” he told us. “And then
they started talking about the chickens.”
Chickens live in stable social groups, Josh learned. They can recognize
each other—and over a hundred other beings—by their facial features. They
also converse with each other using twenty-four distinct vocalizations that
communicate a wealth of information, such as whether a predator is
traveling by air , land, or sea. They can identify images, remember objects
hidden from view , play small musical instruments, solve problems, and
even do simple math.
Watching this documentary was probably tripling the total amount of
time Josh had spent in his entire life learning about chickens, but he found
he couldn’ t tear himself away .
Chickens form bonds with each other , the documentary continued, and
other species, including ours. They show a wide range of emotions, such as
grief when mourning the loss of f an of fspring or of a being they had bonded
with.
“Right at that moment, my dog walked into the living room, plopped
down on the carpet, and laid his huge head upon my foot. And that’ s when it
hit me. Why love my dog, but completely ignore the pain of these other
animals who could very clearly feel pain just as acutely?” That day , Josh
decided to dedicate the rest of his life to reducing animal suf fering, and it’ s
this sense of purpose that has driven him from breakthrough to
breakthrough ever since.
As you may know , the standard egg-industry practice is for hens to be
crammed four or more to a tiny cage. Each caged hen is provided less space

--- PAGE 210 ---
than an iPad in which to live her entire life. She’ s unable to move more than
a few inches and can’ t spread her wings. (Imagine spending more than a
year in a cage so small you can’ t lift your arms. Ever .) Not surprisingly , the
hens often go crazy from boredom and turn on each other , or even
themselves, and that’ s why the factories slice of f the beaks of female chicks.
After a year or two, the hens are ripped from their cages and stuf fed
inside a carbon dioxide box, where they suf focate to death. “This is what
happens behind almost every carton of eggs you see in supermarkets,”
explains Josh.
The life of chickens in the egg industry is perhaps the one filled with
the most suf fering of any animal raised in food production. Shortly after
hatching, male and female chicks are separated and thrown down separate
chutes or onto separate conveyer belts that lead male chicks to a
“macerating machine,” where they are ground up alive. Since males can’ t
lay eggs, they’re useless in egg production, and they’re a breed that’ s too
small to be of use to the meat industry .
Chickens are the only farm animal excluded from the Humane Methods
of Slaughter Act, so there are no real rules or regulations to govern how
they are treated in a factory environment. Every year , more than 200 million
baby chicks are ground up alive. “Most of us agree that torturing animals is
wrong. Yet without realizing it, most of us give money every day to an
industry that does exactly that,” said an industry insider on condition of
anonymity .
This is why for Josh, changing the way chickens are treated was a first
priority .
He knew he couldn’ t tackle the farming industry head-on; the egg
companies weren’ t going to change their practices just because he asked
nicely . Realizing that these companies have no incentive to change their
ways unless their customers demand it, Josh focused on the customers, like
restaurant chains, grocery stores, and food manufacturers. And that’ s how
Josh ended up traversing an ice-encrusted parking lot in Minneapolis on a
cold winter day .
He was there to meet with about a dozen leaders at General Mills to try
to convince them to stop purchasing eggs from caged hens.
Some members of the GM team conceded that the treatment of these
hens was, indeed, barbaric, and that switching to cage-free eggs was the

--- PAGE 211 ---
right thing to do. But since caged-hen eggs are cheaper , the caging of
chickens for General Mills’ s eggs was to continue.
Josh left that meeting feeling defeated, feeling like he had failed. He’d
been going around the country meeting with companies and too often
hitting brick walls of rebuttals: too much money , too much ef fort, or simply
too much change.
And that’ s when he had a second breakthrough. What if food companies
didn’ t need eggs to make their products? What if we could make doing the
right thing the cheaper and easier thing to do? If they couldn’ t afford to go
cage free, why not replace eggs altogether with something that works just as
well and is actually more af fordable? What if it also made the products less
expensive for customers, the taste more delicious, and the food safer?
Josh had been assuming that he had to fix the system from the inside.
This constraint, he realized, didn’ t need to be there. The entrenched system
inside food companies wouldn’ t change overnight, and in some cases
wouldn’ t change at all. So rather than keep running into brick walls, he
removed the constraint and decided on a flanking maneuver .
And that’ s how Josh Balk and his childhood friend Josh Tetrick created
Hampton Creek. The company’ s first vision was to produce a plant-based
replacement for egg ingredients used in end products like baked goods or
dressings. But it was slow , waiting for companies that produce mayonnaise,
dressing, cookies, cakes, and so on to test the replacement product and of fer
feedback, with no ur gency about actually using them. “It was a frustrating
time in the company’ s history ,” Josh admits.
And that’ s when “the Joshes,” as they are known, had a breakthrough.
Instead of waiting for manufacturers to use their product, why not turn
Hampton Creek into a company that makes those products on its own?
That shift would turn Hampton Creek from a small ingredient company
to what Conscious Company  magazine called “the fastest growing food
company in the world,” selling products like mayo, dressings, cookie
dough, and cookies at grocers across the country . In fact, one of their
products garnered so much buzz it attracted the attention of one of the
giants in the industry—and not in a good way .
In the industrial garage that functioned as the company’ s headquarters,
Josh Tetrick was chatting with his team when a courier walked in and
handed him a lar ge white envelope. Ripping it open, Josh drew out a single

--- PAGE 212 ---
sheet of paper: a legal notice informing Hampton Creek they were being
sued by Unilever , one of the world’ s largest corporations.
Unilever claimed that Hampton Creek’ s Just Mayo was unfairly taking
away market share from its iconic mayonnaise brands, Best Foods and
Hellmann’ s. How was the fledgling company being “unfair” to the global
giant? The lawsuit referenced an antiquated regulation, dating from the
early twentieth century , requiring products labeled as “mayonnaise” to
contain eggs. Of course Hampton Creek’ s Just Mayo was egg free. That was
the whole point.
The first thing that the Joshes felt was despair . How could their start-up
company with a few dozen employees stand up to a $137 billion
multinational food empire with armies of lawyers? “Of course we were
scared,” Josh recalls. “Just fighting the lawsuit seemed like an unrealistic
option; winning wasn’ t even in the realm of possibility .”
But the thing about being driven by a sense of purpose is that it gives
you persistence, courage, a drive to figure things out. Perhaps that’ s why
eureka moments are a common theme in stories of social good, a reward for
the determination, empathy , and boldness found in any ardent advocate. So
the Joshes walked around and around their small San Francisco block,
turning the situation to every angle they could consider . Their breakthrough
came when they boldly turned it upside down. “What if, instead of being
the worst thing that had ever happened to us, this lawsuit could be the best
thing that ever happened to us?”
The regulation upon which Unilever was basing its lawsuit specifically
applied to products labeled as “mayonnaise.” Hampton Creek’ s product
doesn’ t carry that label: it’ s called Just Mayo. Not only were the Joshes on
the right side of the legal battle, they also realized that public opinion would
be on their side too. Who would take the side of Goliath attacking a David
just trying to make a kinder world?
The Joshes were right. Unilever was scolded by everyone from the New
York T imes, to the  Wall Str eet Journal , to NPR, to the Associated Press, and
even David Letterman. The first week of coverage alone brought Hampton
Creek $21 million of free media coverage.
Embarrassed by the media backlash, Unilever quietly dropped the
lawsuit. Within two years, they came out with their own eggless
mayonnaise.

--- PAGE 213 ---
Only five years after Josh’ s first breakthrough in the Minneapolis–St.
Paul Airport, Hampton Creek has expanded to sell more than forty varieties
of plant-based products, including cookies, cookie dough, pancakes, cakes,
and cupcakes at tens of thousands of grocery locations across the U.S. and
China. Bill Gates has predicted that it will be “one of the top three
companies to forever change the food system.”7
Where will your breakthroughs take you?
SuperT ool #3: Meditation
“The word meditation describes a variety of deliberately mental activities,”
Jon Lief f explains. ”Some define it as a type of concentration, others as a
self-study of their own mental processes, and yet others as a method for
transcending worry and concerns.”
Meditation helps you increase mindfulness, which is critical for
breakthroughs. What is mindfulness? Simply paying attention, moment by
moment, to everything that is happening right now . Geor ge de Mestral
noticed the burrs stuck to his clothes and his dog’ s fur after a walk. Looking
at the burrs under a microscope, he noticed they were made up of tiny
hooks. This eventually led him to the creation of Velcro. This is also an
example of associative thinking and an early example of biomimicry .
The same is true of the pacemaker . A professor of electrical engineering
at the University of Buf falo, Wilson Greatbatch was working on a device to
record the rhythm of the heart when he pulled the wrong transistor out of a
box. But he noticed the transistor emitted a steady , regular pulse, like a
heartbeat. He figured this might be used to actually influence and steady a
person’ s heartbeat.
Teflon is another good example. Roy Plunkett was working on a better
refrigerator for DuPont in 1938. He placed a gas in canisters to wait
overnight so he could continue with his experiment in the morning. But
when he returned the canisters were empty . Yet they weighed the same.
Cutting a canister open, he discovered it was coated with the slippery
substance we know as Teflon. But think about how mindful he was. How
observant. How easily he could have been annoyed and moved on.

--- PAGE 214 ---
Regular meditators have more gray matter in their prefrontal cortex,
and over time their brains become finely tuned willpower machines. Better
yet, meditation directly increases the horsepower of your brain’ s
breakthrough council. A very recent study of a variety of meditation
techniques showed increased connectivity in the areas related to memory ,
learning, and emotion.8
Another significant recent study showed that all the main meditation
techniques result in increased folding of the cortex, that is, increased
gyrification. Increased gyrus formation is thought to increase processing of
information, so you could literally become smarter by meditating.9
Meditation is for the mind what a health and fitness program is for the
body . It’s a mental gym, training the mind. Neuroscientists found that when
you ask your brain to meditate, it gets better not just at meditating, but at a
wide range of self-control skills, including attention, stress management,
impulse control, and self-awareness.
In other words, meditation is a lot like exercise. When the body is
trained using exercise, it becomes healthy and fit, which then results in a
whole host of well-documented physical benefits.
Similarly , when the mind is trained using meditation, it also becomes
healthy and fit, which then results in a whole host of well-documented
benefits including improved health, reduction in stress, better concentration,
increased happiness, more satisfying relationships, and even enhanced
resistance to the flu. In some studies, meditation was shown to be more
effective than exercise both in decreasing negative emotions and anxiety
increasing focus.10
Meditation will also turbochar ge your sleep, helping you to get more
from the same amount of sleep.11 (This is the one thing that gets all start-up
founders to suddenly pay attention!)
Meditation in Motion
For those of us who have trouble sitting still, you can start by using your
own motion as an object of meditation. Some meditation traditions have
official “walking periods” during their retreats. Some movement practices,
such as Tai Chi, Qigong, or 5Rhythms, are designed to be meditative. You

--- PAGE 215 ---
can use running to meditate, though we recommend that you run without
any music.
You can, in fact, use any motion as an object of concentration. While
doing the dishes, you can pay attention to the feeling of water splashing on
your hands. Many teachers talk about the concept of minimeditations: using
simple things like handwashing, walking up stairs, or brushing your teeth as
opportunities to practice mindfulness.
You can also focus on external motion. Watch a flame or a fire; it’ s a
great way to start. There’ s a reason humanity has such a long tradition of
fire gazing. You can also watch water or the rustling of tree branches in the
wind.
Whichever form of meditation you choose, we can guarantee that your
mind will wander away from your object of focus many , many times. Don’ t
worry about how often that happens. Simply , gently , return to your object of
concentration whenever you notice that your mind has wandered.
Letting go is an act in which you release your need to control the
situation, you stop telling yourself how it should be. Some teachers describe
this as a catch-and-release process in which you get caught, release
yourself, over and over again.
Catch:  “Why didn’ t I . . .”
Release:  “Oh, there goes a thought about . . .”
Catch:  “I really should . . .”
Release:  “Just because a thought about . . . is floating through my mind
doesn’ t mean I have to believe it.”
. . . and so on. 
You’re not trying to quiet the mind, make it peaceful, make it happy .
“Probably the most destructive myth about meditation is that it is a practice
of quieting the mind,” meditation teacher Isaak Brown told us. “Eventually ,
the mind will get quieter , yes, but I wish no one ever shared that because
now all my clients feel like they’re failing when their minds are chattering
constantly when they meditate.”

--- PAGE 216 ---
Just One Br eath: “Don’t Worry, Be Lazy”
Olivia’ s dear friend and Buddhist meditator Chade-Meng Tan, author of
How to Master Y our Mind in 100 Minutes, Sear ch Inside Y ourself,  and Joy
on Demand, offers in his books practical, concise, funny advice on reaching
inner peace. Hang out with Meng and he will convince you that meditation
does not have to be hard. In fact, it can actually be quite easy . What is the
absolute minimum amount of meditation practice before there is any sort of
benefit? His answer: “One breath. Here, try it right now . It doesn’ t get
easier than this, I promise.”
Putting It into Practice: Meng’ s Lazy Practice
You may close your eyes or keep them open. Take one slow , deep breath. For the duration of that
one breath, give your full attention to your breath in a gentle way . Total and gentle attention on
feeling your breath, that is all. If you prefer a more specific instruction, bring attention to the
feeling in either your nose or the belly as you breathe.
“Simply taking one mindful breath, any time and in any circumstance,
is beneficial,” explains Meng. Taking slow , deep breaths stimulates the
vagus nerve, which in turn activates the parasympathetic nervous system.
That lowers stress, reduces your heart rate and blood pressure, and basically
calms you down.
Like many other meditators and habit experts, Meng recommends
finding a routine cue. He explains that you can use as a trigger the moment
you wake up, the moment you lie down to bed at night, or you can add an
hourly chime to your smartwatch or smartphone and get a mindful breath
reminder once per waking hour .
“They are all great, I use all of them. The one cue I most highly
recommend, however , is this: Every time you have to wait, take a mindful
breath. I spend a lot of my time waiting, and I imagine you do too. I wait at
traffic stops and at lunch queues. I wait at the airport, at the train station,
and at the taxi stand. I wait for meetings to begin, for VIPs to arrive, for my
computer to start up, for Web pages to load up. So much waiting. Every

--- PAGE 217 ---
time I need to wait, I take one or more mindful breaths. This is a wonderful
practice with many benefits.”
Putting It into Practice: Creating a Habit of Taking Mindful Breaths
Choose a cue, something that, when it occurs, activates the habit of taking a mindful
breath. The cue we most highly recommend is any situation in which you have to wait.
Whenever the cue occurs, take one slow , deep breath, and bring some amount of
attention to that breath. For safety reasons (for example, if you’re walking or driving),
you may need to maintain the appropriate amount of attention on your surroundings as
you pay some attention to your breath.
If taking that mindful breath makes you feel any better , simply notice that. That will be
the reward that reinforces the habit.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 218 ---
Chapter Summaries
Chapter  1: The Four  Wings
A breakthrough is an idea that solves a problem or satisfies a need in an
entirely new way . We identified four distinct styles of breakthroughs.
Eureka breakthroughs are clear , sudden, and fully formed. They create great
excitement as you know exactly what problem they will solve and how .
Metaphorical breakthroughs come first as metaphors or analogies,
sometimes as dreams, and require interpretation to understand what
problem they are solving and how . Intuitive breakthroughs defy logic and
explanation and tend to be more of a beginning, the start of progress down a
longer path. Paradigm breakthroughs reveal a grand theory or explanation
that is without any clear , immediate application. They arrive clear like a
eureka breakthrough but with more awe and wonder than excitement. This
is the most rare, but also most powerful type of breakthrough. Each person
is prone to one or two styles. None is better than the other .
Chapter  2: The Chrysalis
Breakthroughs happen when we switch between two dif ferent but
connected brain modes: the focused mode of the executive network, the EN,
and the meandering mode of the default network, the DN. The EN is goal
and action oriented. The DN is associative and nonlinear . Switching
between them in a disciplined way is what creates breakthroughs. The EN
focuses and delivers the problem to the DN, also called the genius council,
to work on at times when you are of f-task. The EN and DN work together
to notice the breakthrough. The hypnagogic and hynopompic states—the

--- PAGE 219 ---
time as we fall asleep and wake up—are particularly fertile environments
for breakthroughs.
Chapter  3: On the Hunt
Breakthroughs occur when we allow our minds to wander . Research shows
that alternating between cognitively challenging work and activities with a
low cognitive load enhances creativity . Walking is one of the best activities
to induce breakthrough mind-wandering. Always have a way to capture
your thoughts along the way . All walking helps; though outside is best, in
the of fice or a treadmill are also very beneficial. Changing your
environment can also spark breakthroughs. You can change your physical
environment, but also your auditory , social, or psychological environments.
And don’ t forget to set constraints, which can be financial constraints, time
constraints, or creative constraints, which can produce unexpected
breakthroughs. Likewise, removing constraints can also be productive.
Chapter  4: The Butterfly Pr ocess
Associative thinking, making associations between two seemingly unrelated
ideas or subjects, is a key attribute of breakthrough thinking. One tool is the
SEIQ, or seven essential innovation questions. These help guide you or
your team through a process to create new associations. Another powerful
tool that can allow you to associate two series of concepts is pattern
recognition. Pattern recognition can help you see the underlying patterns
and connections between two narratives, subjects, entities, roles, and so on,
noting the similarities between them and discovering new applications.
Chapter  5: Cultivating Your Garden
Neuroplasticity is a major tool in our quest to achieve breakthroughs.
Everyone’ s brain remains plastic throughout life. Though many of us are
out of shape neurologically , we can still increase our plasticity . We increase
our plasticity when we do new things, and learn and experience new things
like new tastes, new sights, new sounds, new stories. Or we can play with

--- PAGE 220 ---
Einstein-style thought experiments. Gathering lar ge amounts of information
helps our plasticity , and our genius councils will have more breakthroughs.
Gather information from your area of expertise, from adjacent fields, and
from far afield. Seek input from those in other fields. Also look to nature for
lessons by using the field of biomimicry . And remember to keep notes in a
central place for later reference. Consider a notebook, or an online app like
Evernote, which allows you to sync notes to multiple devices (phone,
laptop, desktop) simultaneously .
Chapter  6: What’ s in Your Net?
We looked at a number of ways to evaluate the breakthroughs in your net.
Edward de Bono’ s Six Thinking Hats is a good tool for this analysis. Talk to
other people about your idea. Create a crew , a trusted group of advisers.
Biomimic your own brain to build that crew , making sure you cover the
qualities needed: empathy , contextual association, and memory , and the
types of people needed: mavens, makers, theorists, and generalists.
Remember to add catalysts and an EN representative. We discussed Tom
Chi’s brainstorm critique method and the power of building a constraint
box. Just try it. Put your idea to the test and see what happens.
Chapter  7: The Spiders of Fear
Fear is a major inhibitor of breakthroughs. We are hardwired to
catastrophize and reinforce our negativity bias. We must learn to handle our
fear and understand that failure is unavoidable. The fear that overwhelms
our breakthrough abilities comes in one of four main forms. The impostor
syndrome can be fought by defining your new self-image, gathering and
displaying supporting evidence, and acting in a new way. The inner critic
can be fought by finding who the “everybody” is you think you’re less than
and creating a new “everybody .” The perfectionist can be fought by
remembering mistakes are rare and thus precious, and by posting pictures
around you of people you admire encouraging your imperfection. The
maximizer can be fought by putting limits on its demands and expectations
of you. To handle fear , be present to the experience of your body , yawn,

--- PAGE 221 ---
relax, and make a practice of gratitude, self-for giveness, and self-
compassion.
Chapter  8: The Failur e Wasps
The experience of failure is one of shame, dismay , disappointment, or even
despair . But with failure skills we can stay in learning mode so we learn
from failure and rebound fast. We can reframe our failures as learning
opportunities with cognitive or social proof reframing. We can also detach
from the emotions failure evokes: just because it’ s in your head doesn’ t
mean it’ s true. Learn how to handle your thoughts, don’ t try to suppress
them. Bouncing back from failure is similar to bouncing back from grief,
the more you accept that the faster you’ll move through it. Practicing failure
helps you get used to the experience, whether in sports, poker , cooking, or
improv . Remember to focus on the behavior , not the outcome. There are
also mental practices, living the moment and rehearsing all possible
outcomes. Learn to judge the outcome by the quality of the decisions made
and learn from others about how they make decisions.
Chapter  9: Icy Uncertainty
Uncertainty is an unavoidable part of the breakthrough process. It is
possible to balance your uncertainty by creating areas of more certainty .
You can create steady routines, habits, and rituals. Start with small, easy ,
specific goals, with triggers to spur consistency—and plan to fail. You can
also learn to think in probabilities, like a poker player . But though
uncertainty can be contained within ranges, it can never be gotten rid of
completely . Practicing uncertainty can be helpful: watch a movie or a
sporting event and notice how the uncertainty of the outcome feels in your
body and mind. The responsibility transfer can be used to help ease the pain
and anxiety of uncertainty .

--- PAGE 222 ---
Chapter  10: The SuperT ools
Knowing what higher purpose your project will serve and reminding
yourself of it regularly helps minimize the worries and self-doubt that can
interfere with breakthrough thinking. Small acts of altruism have a proven
effect on happiness, health, and inventive thinking; just don’ t be fake about
it. Meditating is the ultimate exercise for a stronger , healthier brain. Try it
during the minutes of your day when you’re waiting for things to start.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 223 ---
Key Exercises
Using Sleep to Access Genius Mode
The minutes just before and after sleep can be a fertile environment for
breakthrough. Falling asleep allows us to access DN solutions in the
hypnagogic state. Waking from sleep allows us to discover DN solutions
through the hypnopompic state.
Falling Asleep: Accessing Your Hypnagogic State
How to enter the hypnagogic state:
Clear the room of clutter and distractions.
Have pen and paper , voice recorder , your phone on airplane
mode and set to take notes, or . . .
Dim the lights (or wear an eye mask).
Ensure you’re in a quiet place, or that only white noise is
audible.
Don’ t get too comfortable—no wearing pajamas or getting in
bed.
Try to find time at midday , or right after you’ve eaten, when
you’re just the right amount of tired.
Set your alarm for ten to fifteen minutes.
Take a moment to focus your brain on the problem, and then let
it go. Relax and drift of f.

--- PAGE 224 ---
Waking Up: Accessing the Hypnopompic State
How to access the hypnopompic state:
Watch a documentary on something you know nothing about.
Thinking about new narratives will trip new neural circuits and
help your brain form new associations.
Look through old photos. Your DN might find something
valuable in a memory file that you’d for gotten years ago.
Read a book from your adolescence. Old thoughts and feelings
will come rushing in.
Take a walk outside. You’ll simultaneously oxygenate your
brain, flip the script on your bedtime routine, and see and feel
things more interesting than your bathroom.
Choose a progressive alarm that starts out quietly and builds in
volume. You don’ t want to be jolted awake, bypassing the
liminal state you were trying to take advantage of. Nature sounds
work well here.
Have a recording device nearby , whether to write, type, or record
your voice. The breakthroughs emer ging from the hypnopompic
state can be fleeting and ephemeral, so if you don’ t record them,
they’ll retreat from you as you wake up.
Mindless Activities We Recommend
To achieve true breakthroughs we must allow our minds to wander .
Research shows that alternating between cognitively challenging work and
activities with a low cognitive load enhances creativity .
Mindless activities we recommend:
Doing puzzles or walking labyrinths
Watching a movie you’ve already seen countless times
Throwing a rubber ball against the wall
Watching sunlight through the trees
Staring out the window
Running

--- PAGE 225 ---
Washing dishes by hand
Playing video games
Folding laundry
Cleaning a cluttered space
Drawing, doodling, or using an adult coloring book
Cooking a meal you’ve cooked many times before
Creative Walking
Walking has been shown to be one of the best activities to enhance
creativity . It is a wonderful way to set the conditions for a breakthrough, but
there is more to it than simply meandering along.
Define your problem. The act of verbalizing what you’re looking
for can get you started on finding the answer .
Review your raw material. Read over the latest information
you’ve collected. Check all the random Post-it notes and slips of
paper you’ve jotted notes on, or any digital equivalent.
Set a goal. Are you going to walk till you break through the
blockage, or just for a set period of time or to a destination?
Pay attention. It’ s fine to space out a bit, but don’ t neglect the
scenery entirely .
Carry a notebook. Always have a way to record your thoughts on
hand.
Keep something in your hand like a coin, a stone, or a memento.
Our hands send massive amounts of information to our brains
and keeping those channels open keeps our brains in a more
open, associative state.
Stop and write it down. Don’ t enjoy the moment of insight so
much you keep playing with it in your head. Few things are as
frustrating as for getting a brilliant thought.
Change Your Environment
This change can be to your physical environment, but it can also be a
change to your auditory , social, or psychological environments.

--- PAGE 226 ---
Change Your Perspective
Put up prisms, which combine the advantages of light, color , and
motion.
Bring nature indoors by filling your creative space with natural
elements such as plants, rocks, a small fountain, natural light,
etc.
Climb a tree. Yes, we’re serious. You probably haven’ t done it in
some time, and that’ s exactly why you should do it. Seeing the
world from a weird angle is surprisingly helpful in unlocking a
new perspective.
If you live in a city , go to the top of a tall building and look out.
If your building has windows in public spaces, go up and look
from there. Borrow a colleague’ s office that looks out a dif ferent
side of the building than yours. Stare out the window with the
new view and notice the dif ferences. How are the streets laid
out? What are the trees like? Where are the bodies of water?
How would you have designed the city dif ferently?
Change Your Physical Envir onment
Right now , find five colors you enjoy around you.
Touch textures till you find five you find enjoyable.
Find five dif ferent hand movements. Go ahead, we’ll wait. Just
do dif ferent things with your hands.
Change Your Auditory Envir onment
An app called Cof fitivity recreates the ambient noise of a cof fee
shop. (The creators originally set out to test the ef fect of
background noise on productivity levels.)
If you’re stuck doing repetitive work, binaural-beat tracks—
which play slightly dif ferent frequencies into your right and left
ear—can help you through the laborious implementation
necessary to turn an insight into reality .

--- PAGE 227 ---
Try electronic music, which features gradually building
“narratives” of repeated base melodies.
The chug-chugging of a train and the churning of a washing
machine are incredibly soothing. You can find countless clips
online.
For a choice of ambient sounds try the Web site
ASoftMurmur .com. It gives you choices that you can mix and
match, like rain and thunder , or waves and wind, or waves and
rain.
Change Your Psychological Envir onment
Watch a documentary about a topic you’d consider “random.”
Try to find connections to what you are working on. How is this
new world of bourbon distillers in rural Kentucky in any way
similar to your project on marketing lip balm?
Spend the day dressed like someone else. If you’re usually a
casual dresser , wear a suit. If you wear a suit every day , try
wearing a sleeveless shirt and shorts. How do you feel dif ferent,
knowing that you’re being perceived dif ferently? (Our clothes
are an element of our psychological environment. Several studies
have shown that participants’  confidence levels were boosted by
wearing a doctor ’s white lab coat.)
For the next twenty minutes, give in to your first impulse. Just do
whatever you feel like doing. Harder than you thought, right? We
are constantly stopping ourselves from doing all kinds of things.
Seven Essential Innovation Questions
Use these by yourself or with your team to look at your problem or need
from every angle and possibility . You can go down the list in order or jump
around. Whenever you get stuck, just choose another direction from the list.
1. Look
Higher: Look at something from a 30,000-foot view .

--- PAGE 228 ---
Reverse: Look at something in reverse, from the back, from the other
side.
Value: Look at something from the point of view of its value.
Kids: Look at something the way a kid might look at it.
Ignore: Look at something and ignore what you know to be true about
it.
Holistic: Look at something from the point of view of the whole thing,
from a systems point of view .
2. Use
Leverage: How could you use this to leverage something else?
Foundation: How could you use this to build the foundation for
something?
Substitute: How could you use this in place of something else?
Aspect: How could you use an aspect of this in a new way?
Change: How could you use this to change something you’re doing?
Apply: How could you apply this in a new way?
3. Move
Import: What new component could you bring in to make a change?
Rearrange: What could you rearrange to make a change?
Replace: What could you swap out and replace to make a change?
Remove: What could you remove to make a change?
Speed: What could you make go faster or slower to make a change?
Frequency: What could you have happen more or less often to make a
change?

--- PAGE 229 ---
4. Inter connect
Power: What could you connect to create a more powerful idea?
Combine: What could you combine with to make something new?
Network: What could you network with to make something new?
Transparent: What could you expose to make something new?
Open: What could you open to the world to see something new emer ge?
Partnership: What could you partner with to make something new?
5. Alter
Quality: What could you improve the quality of?
Design: What could you design dif ferently?
Performance: How could you increase the performance ability?
Aesthetics: How could you change the look?
Experiential: How could you change the experience?
Standardize: How could you make it fit with other things?
6. Make
Processes: What new processes could you create?
Meaning: What new meaning could you create/infuse?
Harness: What could be harnessed to make something new?
Instantiate: What can you instantiate into something new?
Functions: What new functions can you create?
Specialize: What could you make more specialized and focused?
7. Imagine

--- PAGE 230 ---
Amplify: How can you imagine amplifying this?
Easier: How can you imagine making this easier to use, buy , sell,
assemble?
Negatives: What are the negatives that you could fix?
Go: Imagine anything you can.
Sci-fi: Imagine a sci-fi solution or improvement.
Try: Try using IT  in dif ferent ways to see what happens.
Plasticity Exer cises
Experiment with Movement
Use your nondominant hand for a variety of activities. Brush
your teeth, use a fork, use the key to open your house, write your
name. This is also a great exercise to experience what it’ s like to
build new connections—you’ll really feel neuroplasticity at
work.
Experiment with T aste
Go to a restaurant and order something you’ve never had there
before. Really taste it. What’ s different about it? Your brain has
to create new connections in order to build a structure to
represent new flavors.
Make a dish, but leave all the salt out of the recipe. Taste it.
Notice how the lack of salt changes the flavor . Now add just a
little. And taste. Then add a little bit more. Inch your way
forward until you’ve added the perfect amount of salt.
Experiments with Sight
Take a new route to work, the market, or home. Notice as many
new things as you can. The next day , take the exact same route,
but this time try to predict the landmarks you will see.

--- PAGE 231 ---
Watch twenty minutes of a foreign film without subtitles. See
what you can piece together about the plot. Are you watching
facial expressions more? How well can you understand the
emotional state of the characters even without their words? A
few of our favorites are:
Life Is Beautiful
Amelie
The House of Flying Daggers
Sit in a cof fee shop while pretending to read this book, and
watch the people around you. Don’ t worry , they’ll be too focused
on whatever they’re doing to notice you. Look at their facial
expressions. Look at how they hold their bodies. Are they
moving fast or slow? Do they seem jumpy , nervous, neurotic?
Now pick one person and imagine what his morning has been
like. If he’ s on a computer , try to imagine what he is typing. Is it
for work? Is he searching for a new home? Is he shopping?
Writing an old flame? Building a narrative with a who, what,
why, when, and how is great plasticity work.
Experiment with Sound
Listen to music from another culture, whether Bollywood dance
music, African blues, or traditional Afghani music. Lose yourself
in completely dif ferent tempos. If you are home alone, try to
dance. When you try to figure out how to move your body to an
unfamiliar rhythm, you force your brain to translate new sounds
into movement.
Plasticity Thought Experiments
Gravity:  Imagine that gravity stops working after 10 P.M. Now ,
what does the world look like? Are our beds on the ceiling? What
does this do to the sports we play? How do we transport goods?
Do people have parties in trees covered by nets? Is there a new
business making those nets? Are there lawsuits when the nets fail

--- PAGE 232 ---
and people go floating of f all night? Are movies made where true
love is found when these people float down in some random
place in the morning? Do teenagers sabotage the nets to float of f
for adventure?
Social norms:  Let’s say that you are allowed to kick someone if
they truly annoy you. Now what does the world look like? How
do you prove the person truly annoyed you? Are there special
courts to determine whether you were truly annoyed? How hard
are you allowed to kick someone? Are special shoes made that
allow you to kick without leaving a mark? Is there a social peace
movement to stop the kicking?
Age:  Imagine you just discovered that you are guaranteed to live
to be 130 years old and remain in excellent physical health. You
might notice an internal reaction, perhaps a fleeting thought of
“Wait, I thought I would live till . . .” It’ s natural to
unconsciously set expectations. Did you know you had been
using that age as a general barometer? Now try to imagine what
your life would look like. How does that af fect the decisions you
make? Will you stay in your current career the whole time? Will
you remain in your current marriage or relationship? How would
society change if everyone were to live to 130? Would everyone
be expected to have more than one marriage? How long would
people wait to have children? Would everyone have to wait their
turn to have children due to overpopulation from longer life
spans? Would people auction of f their right to have children to
others?
Magic:  Maybe you’ve heard tales of cities that stand entirely on
stilts with suspended walkways for sidewalks. Or a city that
consists of nothing but plumbing, pipes, showerheads, bathtubs,
and valves connected in a maze of metal devoid of any buildings.
Other cities trade only in memories, and you can only buy things
by sharing memories. Now you design one of these magical
cities. What does it look like? How do the people interact in this
city? What are the rules? Here’ s a way to increase your brain
plasticity even more: Imagine you are in a scene, like a character
in a highly realistic video game. You’re walking down the street,

--- PAGE 233 ---
opening doors, turning your head left and right to look at new
things. Imagine putting your hand up to feel the wind. Walk
down one of the main streets and hear the traf fic.
Using the Six Hats to Evaluate Potential Br eakthr oughs
Find people who are naturally talented and have one or more of the thinking
styles. Run your breakthrough idea by them and get their feedback. Try to
have all six thinking styles represented.
The blue hat focuses on the process, managing time, keeping the big
picture in mind.
The white  hat focuses on facts on the ground, figures, metrics, the
reality of the situation.
The red hat focuses on the emotional resonance of the situation and the
solution, and how others might be impacted, including your empathy
and fears.
The green hat focuses on creative thinking, new possibilities, new
perspectives on the situation and the solution, and on refining new
ideas.
The black  hat has a skeptical outlook and considers risks, potential
problems and obstacles of the solution, or weaknesses in the plan.
The yellow  hat, on the other hand, is an optimistic outlook, positive
thinking, a focus on the benefits and best-case scenarios of possible
solutions.
Breakthr ough Tools for  Teams
When building your breakthrough crew or genius council, you want the
following qualities in the room:

--- PAGE 234 ---
Empathy:  You’re looking for people who are skilled at taking
other perspectives and have a natural ability to feel how others
might respond to a new idea. You want the people others go to
when they’re having a hard time.
Contextual associations:  You want people who have worked in
different industries, people who have dual majors in subjects like
math and poetry , or French and economics. You need people who
have a deep hobby in something apart from their job, like
computer programmers who practice Tai Chi or executives who
paint.
Memory:  Historians could be good for this, or people interested
in history . People who worked on previously successful
breakthroughs in a similar space are helpful, as is anyone who
has been there before and is reflective about his experience.
And you want the following personality types in the room:
Mavens:  You want someone on your crew who has her finger on
the pulse of the market, the company , the culture. You want
someone who knows what is expected to happen in five years
and is already up on the thing that will be huge in six months.
This person can gauge your breakthrough and give thoughts
about whether or not it is new enough, dif ferent enough, and is
pointing in the same direction as the cultural arrow .
Makers:  You want the mechanical engineers, the designers, the
builders, the people who will draw and build mock-ups and get
very concrete about an idea. You need to stay grounded in reality
and in what is feasible.
Theorists:  You need people who have a deep knowledge of the
subject even if they’ve never tried building something but have
only studied it. Theorists can often of fer deep pattern recognition
and new insights that those only concerned with applying their
idea might miss. This means including people who might be a
little older .

--- PAGE 235 ---
Generalists:  These people have a wide range of knowledge and
as such they are very good at acquiring new information. They
learn new things and integrate them and connect them to other
things. They can be very helpful just listening to topics they
don’t know about. Their lack of knowledge leaves them open to
helpful connections and insights.
Tom Chi’ s Brainstorm
1. Start by having everyone state the things that work about the
breakthrough. Write those on a board. Pick a goal, say fifteen
things that work.
2. Don’ t write them in a list. Write them all over the board. No
list, no prioritizing, no top, and no bottom.
3. Draw a picture beside the idea. Pictures turn on a dif ferent part
of the brain, the nonverbal part.
4. Tell everyone to do their best not to judge anything. Try to stay
open minded. Do not voice opinions. Try not to let your ego
become attached to any of the ideas on the board.
Chi suggests you spend thirty minutes to reach your goal of fifteen
things that are working. And then you need to create a transitional moment.
5. Take two minutes of silence. Tell everyone to look at the board,
take it all in, and let things start to connect.
The silence and the looking at the board are a way to use the EN to
direct the DN’ s genius lounge to start connecting things, and to give it space
to do so. You are creating a ritual to slide everyone into their associative
state.
6. Have people draw the connections they see among the things
that are working. Have them up at the board drawing lines. You
want people to see the connections. Use dif ferent colored

--- PAGE 236 ---
markers for the dif ferent connections. (The board starts to look
like a spider web. That’ s okay . It will slow down naturally .)
7. Ask people to tell little stories about the connections they see,
saying how these things are connected. The stories encourage
people to build on one another .
8. Clusters will begin to emer ge, groups of connected ideas. Once
you have six, eight, ten clusters, ask people how they feel about
them. Ask them to rate the clusters on a scale of 1 to 10.
9. Only look at clusters that rank at 7 or above.
Changing Your Self-image
Define your goal. What self-image do you want?
Gather past evidence. Look into the past and write out five ways
you’ve been creative.
Put the evidence on display . Pin them up on the wall or use a
Post-it. Do this every night for ten days. On the last evening,
read all the items at once. See how you feel about your self-
image now .
Embrace your new self-image. Take advantage of the science of
small wins and build up many “small successes.”
Handling the Impostor  Syndr ome
Shortcut #1: Change the Label
Try simply changing the name of what you aspire to be, and see if there is
another term that fits more easily with your current self-image. Olivia, for
example, doesn’ t consider herself to be creative. Resourceful, yes.
Ingenious, yes. Those words feel comfortable. But she’ s not comfortable
calling herself “creative,” because creativity is not in her self-image. To her ,
“creative” belongs to those other people who have a design sensibility , to
artists, to people who do creative things (like music, art, and theater).
Creativity feels intangible, elusive, something she can’ t see the contours of.
But with the self-image of someone who is “ingenious and resourceful,” she
achieves the same creativity .

--- PAGE 237 ---
Shortcut #2: Flip the Scenario
Ask yourself which elements of your experience (or lack thereof),
personality , or background does the impostor syndrome use to make you
feel like a fraud. Take each of these in turn, and flip them around.
“I’m too young for this job” becomes “My youth is a huge advantage
because . . .” Do you have a better grasp of new technology? A better
understanding of the customer base? A greater willingness to take risks, to
try new things?
“I’ve never worked in this industry before. I’m not an industry expert”
becomes “The fact that I’m not an industry expert is a huge advantage
because they already have industry experts falling from the rafters. They
don’t need one more. What I can bring is a wealth of new perspectives and
different experiences, and I can bring everything I’ve learned outside this
industry to bear on the problems we’re facing here.” And so forth . . .
Handling Fear: Quick Fixes
Here are some quick fixes if you’re feeling that you are in a less than
creative state:
Check your breathing. Use the body’ s effect on the mind by
taking deep, slow breaths.
Change your body’ s position. Assuming a strong, confident
physical posture will make you genuinely feel more confident
and more powerful. As you feel more powerful, your body
language will adapt accordingly .
Imagine getting a great hug from someone you love for twenty
seconds.
Name your feelings. Try simply naming the feelings you’re
experiencing—anxiety , fear , shame, and so on.
Yawn. Yawning activates the parasympathetic nervous system
and relaxes our body . This is why you’ll often see athletes yawn
before a competition.

--- PAGE 238 ---
The Relaxation Response
Step 1: Pick a focus word, phrase, image, or use your breath as an
object of focus.
Step 2: Find a quiet place and sit calmly in a comfortable position.
Step 3: Close your eyes.
Step 4: Progressively relax all your muscles.
Step 5: Breathe slowly and naturally . As you exhale, repeat or picture
silently your focus word or phrase, or simply focus on your breathing
rhythm.
Step 6: Assume a passive attitude. When other thoughts appear , simply
think Oh well,  and return to your focus.
Step 7: Continue with this exercise for an average of twelve to fifteen
minutes.
Step 8: Practice this technique at least once daily .
Paul Zak’ s Favorite Oxytocin Triggers
Give someone a hug. Aim for eight hugs a day!
Compassion meditation.
Dance.
Soak in a hot tub.
Surprise someone with a gift.
Pet a dog.
Take a hike with a friend.
Write a note of thanks to a teacher or mentor .
Write Your Own Biography
Write about your life as though an outside person was describing it. Focus
on all of your positive aspects as a human. Write about your occupation and
the people you are surrounded by in your workplace. Give a description of
some of your most meaningful personal relationships and consider the good
things these people would say about you. Find positive things that have
happened today no matter the size or significance.

--- PAGE 239 ---
Take the time to write down this narrative. Just thinking about it won’ t
be as ef fective.
Metta
Sit comfortably , close your eyes, and take two or three deep
breaths. As you inhale, imagine drawing in masses of clean air
toward the top of your head; then let it whoosh through you from
head to toe as you exhale, washing all concerns away .
Think of any occasion in your life when you performed a good
deed, however great or small. Just one good action—one
moment of truth, generosity , or courage. Focus on that memory
for a moment.
Now think of one being, whether present or past, mythical or
actual—Jesus, Buddha, Mother Teresa, the Dalai Lama—who
could have great af fection for you. This could be a person, a pet,
or even a stuf fed animal.
Picture this being in your mind. Imagine their warmth, their
kindness and compassion. See it in their eyes and face. Feel their
warmth radiating toward you, enveloping you.
See yourself through their eyes with warmth, kindness, and
compassion. Feel them giving you complete for giveness for
everything your inner critic says is wrong. You are completely
and absolutely for given. You have a clean slate.
Feel them giving you wholehearted acceptance. You are accepted
as you are, right now , at this stage of growth, imperfections and
all.
Acceptance Manifesto
You are perfect. At this stage of development, you are perfect.
At this stage of growth, you are perfect.
At this stage of perfection, you are perfect.

--- PAGE 240 ---
With everything that’ s in your head and heart, you are perfect.
With all your imperfections, you are perfect.
For this phase of growth, you are perfect.
You are fully approved just the way you are, at this stage of
development, right now .
Fear  No Mor e
The skill is in knowing how to handle the negative thoughts, rather than
trying to suppress them or ar gue with them.
Don’ t give your thoughts the benefit of the doubt. Sure, they’re
yours. But that doesn’ t mean they’re accurate. Start from the
notion that you probably missed a lot of things and there are
positive elements waiting to be noticed.
Imagine your thoughts like graf fiti on a wall.
Name what you are experiencing: anger , anxiety , self-criticism.
Naming what you are experiencing can help you neutralize it.
Make it less personal. Don’ t say, “I’m feeling ashamed.” Instead
say, “There is shame being felt.” Take a step back. Observe the
experience like an anthropologist observing a ritual. Imagine that
you’re a scientist observing a phenomenon: “Fascinating. There
are self-critical thoughts happening.”
Imagine looking at the Earth from space. Now come closer , see
your country , your neighborhood, your house. Here you are, this
one person, having this experience on this planet right now .
Imagine your negative thoughts are a podcast. Take of f your
headphones, set your music player aside.
Lay out what it would look like if everything you’re worried
about happens, if everything that can go wrong does. Now notice
that you survived that scenario.
Remember all the times before when you felt a similar negativity
or anxiety . You didn’ t think you’d make it through then. And yet
you did.

--- PAGE 241 ---
Getting Closur e on a Failur e
To get closure on a failure, neuroscientist Richard Wiseman suggests a
three-step process:
1. Write it down: pour out onto paper everything that’ s on your
mind, everything that weighs on your heart. What happened,
how you felt—this is a mental pur ge, or as some of our clients
call it, a “vomit sprint.”
2. Rip it up: with gusto and enthusiasm. Really get into the
motions, hear the ripping, feel the tearing.
3. Burn it, if you can, and of ficially declare the failure closed.
The Failur e Blueprint
Reframe failure—learn to see it as an essential part of the
breakthrough process.
Practice failure:
Experientially: sports, poker , cooking, etc.
Mentally: rehearsals and visualization.
During failure, use self-for giveness and self-compassion to quiet
your fight-or -flight response.
Learn from the failure:
Don’ t beat yourself up.
Ignore the outcome (for now).
Deconstruct the process.
Look around the failure.
Go see other people.
Write up your post-mortem.
Knowing that there actually is a “right” way to fail helps talk
back to:
The inner critic: “W e were following the Failure
Blueprint.”
The impostor syndrome: “Maybe we’re an impostor , but
we have a blueprint to follow that will help us do things
right.”

--- PAGE 242 ---
The perfectionist: “W e’re perfectly following the blueprint.
It just so happens the blueprint calls for imperfection and
failure.”
The maximizer: “This is the way to get the most out of the
process.”
The Responsibility Transfer
Sit comfortably or lie down, relax, and close your eyes.
Take two or three deep breaths. As you inhale, imagine drawing
clean air toward the top of your head. As you exhale, let that air
whoosh through you, washing away all worries and concerns.
Pick an entity—God, Fate, the universe, whatever may best suit
your beliefs—you can think of as benevolent.
Imagine lifting the weight of everything you’re concerned about
—this meeting, this interaction, this day—of f your shoulders and
placing it on the shoulders of the entity you’ve chosen. They’re
in char ge now .
Visually lift it of f your shoulders and feel the dif ference as you
are now no longer responsible for the outcome of any of these
things. Everything is taken care of. You can sit back, relax, and
enjoy whatever good you can find along the way .
Finding a Purpose at Your 100th Birthday Gathering
Sit or lie down, close your eyes, and set the scene. Where is your
gathering being held? What day of the week, what time of day?
What is the weather like? See the building where the gathering is
being held. See people arriving. Who’ s coming? What are they
wearing? Now move into the building and look around inside.
Do you see flowers? If so, smell the flowers’  scent heavy in the
air. See people coming through the door , perhaps getting drinks
at the bar or food at the buf fet. Imagine, perhaps, that everyone is
sitting around round tables filling the room. What kind of chairs
are they sitting in? What do these chairs feel like?

--- PAGE 243 ---
Someone taps on a glass to request attention, and announces that
the toasts will begin. Think of the people you care most about or
whose opinions matter most to you. What are they thinking? See
them standing up one after another and delivering their message
for you or their stories about you. What are they saying? Do they
mention accomplishments? Regrets?
Now think: What would you like them to have said? What
accomplishments would you have liked them to mention, if any?
What regrets do you have?
Meng’ s Lazy Practice
You may close your eyes or keep them open. Take one slow , deep breath.
For the duration of that one breath, give your full attention to your breath in
a gentle way . Total and gentle attention on feeling your breath, that is all. If
you prefer a more specific instruction, bring attention to the feeling in either
your nose or the belly as you breathe.
Creating a Habit of Taking Mindful Br eaths
Choose a cue, something that, when it occurs, activates the habit
of taking a mindful breath. The cue we most highly recommend
is any situation in which you have to wait.
Whenever the cue occurs, take one slow , deep breath, and bring
some amount of attention to that breath. For safety reasons (for
example, if you’re walking or driving), you may need to
maintain the appropriate amount of attention on your
surroundings as you pay some attention to your breath.
If taking that mindful breath makes you feel any better , simply
notice that. That will be the reward that reinforces the habit.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 244 ---
Science Appendix
Neur oplasticity
Dr. Jon Lief f, our main science adviser on this book, graduated from Yale
University with a degree in mathematics before going on to Harvard
Medical School. He is a specialist in the interface of psychiatry , neurology ,
and medicine.
He explained that in order for you to have a thought, you need to build
the physical structure of the thought. That means your brain has to build
new neurotransmitter receptors to allow your neurons to connect to each
other in a new way .
Imagine your neurons as a string of trapeze artists. To have a new
thought, these trapeze artists have to connect to new trapeze artists. But all
the trapezists have dif ferently shaped hands. So in order to swing from one
and get caught by another , they need to grow new hands—a new , specially
shaped set of hands that can connect with the new trapeze artist. This is how
your ability to think works. To create new thoughts, your neurons have to
build new hands to grab each other with. How does your brain do that?
We’ve all heard of DNA, the double helix of our genes. But not many
of us remember RNA. RNA  is shaped like a single helix with nucleotides
running its length. Some RNA  is “messenger RNA,” or mRNA, which
sends instructions to a dif ferent kind of RNA, “transfer RNA,” or tRNA,
which looks like a clover leaf with three hairpin loops.
When you have a new thought, mRNA  sends instructions to tRNA,
which is like a little factory that physically builds the new set of hands, a
protein. It starts building the protein by stacking amino acids one on top of
the other , like beads on a string, in a specific order . It does this in

--- PAGE 245 ---
milliseconds. When the chain of amino acids is complete, the tRNA  stops
stacking, and the chain folds itself into the proper shape and becomes a
protein. That protein will become a new neurotransmitter receptor . This
happens millions of times during millisecond intervals.
All these new neurotransmitter receptors give your brain the ability to
make brand new neuronal connections, and this means you now have the
ability to have a new thought. A new thought has a physical form.
Connections between neurons are physical structures. They exist in the
physical world. A new thought necessitates and leads to new connections;
an old thought doesn’ t.
Neuroplasticity refers to your ability to build these new
neurotransmitter receptors. If your brain can build lots of new receptors,
you are considered highly plastic and you can have lots of new thoughts. If
your brain cannot build lots of new receptors, you are considered less
plastic. You cannot think as many new thoughts.
Here’ s how Jon Leif f described the life of a thought to us: With each
mental event, dramatic structural changes occur inside lar ge numbers of
neurons, outside of neurons in the extracellular space, at the synapses
between neurons, and in glial brain cells. Remarkably , these molecular
changes occur instantaneously all over the brain in specific circuits using
many dif ferent mechanisms.
For each dif ferent event, the same neuron can be used in completely
different circuits. Signals in the circuits occur simultaneously with other
types of electrical communication, including synchronous oscillations and
changes in the extracellular electrical potentials. With each new learning
event, new cells are minted from stem cells and incorporated into the
neuronal circuits. This is just part of the life of a thought in the brain.
Why are neurotransmitter receptors so important to new thoughts, or
thoughts at all, for that matter? Your neurons have these spindly arms called
dendrites. Dendrites branch out from a neuron’ s cell and receive messages
from other neurons. These messages come in the form of chemical
neurotransmitters like dopamine and seratonin. When the dendrites make
contact with the neurotransmitter , they send an electrical signal to the
neuron’ s cell body . This is how your neurons speak to one another .
Dendrites are the physical structures neurons use to reach out and listen to
one another .

--- PAGE 246 ---
All up and down the length of these dendrites are these little heads.
These are the neurotransmitter receptors. These are the specially shaped
trapeze hands that receive the messages from the neurotransmitters. Plastic
people tend to have lar ge dendritic heads on their neurons. These lar ger
heads hold more receptors. And the more receptors you have, the more
information you can process. The more receptors you have, the more
chances there are for your neurons to communicate, and the more
bandwidth you have to think new thoughts.
When you are highly plastic, these dendritic heads with their
neurotransmitter receptors are constantly being built. When you are less
plastic, these dendritic heads are getting pruned.
. . . You’ll find more at www .TheButterfly .net.
The Default Network
What is the default mode network?
First, let’ s talk about how the DN fits into the brain. The brain can’ t be
understood simply as a set of specific regions doing specific tasks. No one
brain region is an island. Instead, the brain is an “immensely complex
interconnected system.”1 It is a sprawl of networks that connect to and
overlap with other networks.
Neuroscientists Dardo Tomasi and Nora Volkow identified seven
overlapping networks covering 80 percent of all the gray matter in the
brain. These involved four major cortical networks (default mode, dorsal
attention, visual, and somatosensory) linked to four major hubs (ventral
precuneus/posterior cingulate, inferior parietal cortex, cuneus, and
postcentral gyrus), and three subcortical networks (tied to hubs involving
the cerebellum, thalamus, and amygdala).
The DN is one of the seven overlapping networks that cover 80 percent
of all the grey matter in the brain. These seven networks split further into
two groups: the major cortical networks and the three subcortical networks.
The DN’ s associative power probably exists because it is made up of some
of the brain’ s major hubs, its major crossroads and switching stations.
Our default network is one of several intrinsic brain systems
functioning at all times without our conscious knowledge or ef fort. Just as

--- PAGE 247 ---
we have systems that keep us breathing and keep our hearts beating, we
also have systems that are exploring our environment, exploring our
internal milieu, thinking about ourselves, and using all this information to
make sense of the world. The ener gy devoted to intrinsic (unconscious)
activity might be as high as 90 percent of our overall ener gy expenditure.
Now let’ s take a deeper look at some of these regions that make up the
DN.
The posterior inferior parietal lobes, one on the left side and one on the
right side of your brain, have millions of nerves that connect to your body’ s
physical sensors: hands, fingertips, skin, balance. Thus your brain takes in
all this physical information through the parietal lobes. The electrical
impulses get interpreted by your brain to create a map of your physical
experience. This map is then ready to be used by your DN.
If you are not focused on a task but doing something physical, that
information goes to the anterior cingulate cortex, the posterior cingulate
cortex, the precuneus, the medial prefrontal cortex, and other parts of the
DN, and they all start sharing information.
Looking at this network in our brains helps explain the oddity of how
such an internal, nonphysical thing like a breakthrough can so often be
connected to physical activity . Your physical activity plays an important
role in your innovative process. Taking a walk, running water over your
hand, listening to music, exercising, any of these can make your default
network spring to life, triggering a series of relations between concepts that
lead to breakthroughs.
Think of Archimedes stepping into the bath, and Newton watching the
apple fall. It was not happenstance that these physical actions led to
insights.
Another part of the network is known as the temporal gyrus. You have
one on either side of your brain, but when it comes to a moment of insight,
it’s the right gyrus that matters. The right side handles more of the abstract,
context-oriented understanding. At the moment of insight, the breakthrough,
the anterior superior temporal gyrus has a burst of gamma waves.
Neuroscientists can actually see you have a breakthrough before you realize
you’ve had it. The temporal gyrus is known to be engaged in the
interpretation of metaphors, like those we often get in dreams or the kind
that lead to breakthroughs.

--- PAGE 248 ---
The temporoparietal junction is a region associated with theory of
mind, that is, our ability to gauge what others are thinking. The
hippocampus is where we create memories, but also where we remember
the past and imagine the future.
The cingulate gyrus is part of the so-called salience network, which
switches internal attention from DN to EN. Most of the time, your DN is
functioning below your level of awareness. When a threshold is reached,
the salience network switches your attention from the DN to the EN, and
suddenly the breakthrough enters your consciousness.
We would have thought the DN did the creating, the EN did the
evaluating, and the salience network switched you back and forth across the
awareness border . But it appears that both the EN and the DN are involved
in the evaluation of the ideas.
The cingulate gyrus includes the anterior cingulate and insula, and is
involved in a wide range of cognitive functions, initiation, motivation, and
goal-directed behavior . The dorsal anterior cingulate has been associated
with orienting attention to the most relevant environment, to stimuli
involved with intra- and extrapersonal events.2
How does this system work to give us our breakthroughs? To be clear ,
no one is absolutely sure. As Dr . Raichle said, “W e have a very narrow
window on this. Our brain is insanely complex and has spent years as a
prediction machine. We don’ t really know how it does it.” But new research
by Dr . Kalina Christof f at the University of British Columbia sheds light on
this mysterious and powerful process that we all have access to and that
gives us all the ability to be prediction machines, breakthrough machines.
Your hippocampus is the part of your brain that creates your memories.
Its job is to encode new experiences so that you can remember them. When
you are doing something, when you’re on-task, your hippocampus is taking
in information. It is creating packets of connected neurons that will become
your memory . But that’ s just stage one. It is during this stage, when you are
on-task, that your DN goes a little quiet.
Then comes the next stage. You stop doing what you were doing and
you are now of f-task. If you are resting, your hippocampus replays your
experience. It sporadically fires, activates traces of memories, or a few

--- PAGE 249 ---
traces that get recombined and form new events—events you’ve never
experienced before. Sometimes it simulates future events.
All of this happens in your unconscious. The hippocampus seems to be
related to the origin of thought. These thoughts originate in your
unconscious, emer ging out of your hippocampus while you rest, daydream,
sleep. Your hippocampus is recombining and reactivating traces and
fragments of memories spontaneously . Then, and this is still a mystery for
us, a certain threshold is reached, or a pattern is completed that reaches a
certain level of meaning, and these traces and fragments of memories enter
your DN.
When deliberate and goal oriented, the hippocampus is in input mode,
encoding memories. When mind-wandering, the hippocampus goes into
output mode, and this is when we start generating new thoughts, literally
creating new neural connections. The current theory is that when the
hippocampus is in output mode, sending out those spontaneous, random
trace memories, it is training the cortical brain to be more plastic. By
recombining experiences, the cortical brain creates new connections, and
replays chunks of experience in new (and sometimes bizarre) ways.
Even Dr . Raichle’ s moment of discovering the DN was a spontaneous
thought. To hear him describe it, he had left a meeting and was walking
down the hall. He had spent many years thinking about the brain and its
intrinsic systems. He was working at the lab that created the first PET  scan
and it was his job to figure out what to do with the scanner . The first thing
scientists and cognitive psychologists did was start scanning for what
different activities looked like in the brain. They looked at one activity
versus another , but Dr . Raichle noticed that it wasn’ t black and white; one
area didn’ t turn completely on while another turned completely of f. What
he noticed was that the brain is fully active all the time; the experiments
were just torquing it here or there. He also noticed that no matter what
activity the brain was asked to do, there were a collection of areas that
always went quieter during a task. They seemed to be centered around the
medial parietal cortex near the back of the brain. Dr . Raichle created a file
called the MMP A, Mystery Medial Parietal Area. He started collecting data.
As he said, he’d been thinking about this phenomenon for a long time.
And then after a meeting one day he was walking down the hall and he was
thinking about computers and their default settings and spontaneously came

--- PAGE 250 ---
up with the default mode for the brain. “The idea that the brain had a
default mode of functioning just kind of fit the bill,” he said.
Dr. Raichle’ s DN facilitated a spontaneous breakthrough about nothing
less than the existence of the DN.
. . . You’ll find more on the groundbreaking science of breakthroughs at
www .TheButterfly .net.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 251 ---
Recommended Resources
Books on and About Br eakthr ough Thinking
Italo Calvino, Invisible Cities  (New York: Harcourt, 1974). Recommended as a workbook to increase
plasticity .
G. H. Hardy , A Mathematician’ s Apology  (Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press, 1940). An
excellent first-person account of the creative process for the rational, hard science–minded.
Jeff Hawkins, On Intelligence  (New York: Times Books, 2004). An excellent introduction to the
functioning of the brain.
Arthur Koestler , The Act of Cr eation  (New York: Penguin, 1964). For a deep dive into the nature of
having breakthroughs.
Rollo May , The Courage to Cr eate (New York: W. W. Norton and Co., 1975). For a more artistic and
psychological approach to breakthroughs.
Edward Slingerland, Trying Not to T ry (New York: Broadway Books, 2015). For an excellent
approach to accessing the DN through ancient Chinese practices.
Books on Design Thinking
Tim Brown, Change by Design: How Design Thinking T ransforms Or ganizations and Inspir es
Innovation  (New York: HarperBusiness, 2009).
Tom Kelley , The Art of Innovation: Lessons in Cr eativity fr om IDEO, America’ s Leading Design
Firm  (New York: Crown Business, 2001).
Tina Seelig, inGenius: A Crash Course on Cr eativity  (New York: HarperOne, 2015).
Tina Seelig, Insight Out: Get Ideas Out of Y our Head and into the W orld (New York: HarperOne,
2015).
Books on Removing the Br eakthr ough Blockers
Tara Brach, Radical Acceptance: Embracing Y our Life with the Heart of a Buddha  (New York:
Bantam, 2004). A great resource for emotional training. We have often called this one “graduate
school for the heart.”
Olivia Fox Cabane, The Charisma Myth: How Anyone Can Master the Art and Science of Personal
Magnetism  (New York: Portfolio, 2013). Charisma is not innate, it can be learned, and this book

--- PAGE 252 ---
shows you how .
Robert B. Cialdini, Influence: The Psychology of Persuasion , rev. ed. (New York: Harper Paperbacks,
2006). Considered the “bible” of influence, Cialdini’ s book is required reading in most MBA
programs.
Keith Ferrazzi and Tahl Raz, Never Eat Alone, Expanded and Updated: And Other Secr ets to
Success, One Relationship at a T ime (New York: Crown Business, 2014).
Viktor E. Frankl, Man’ s Sear ch for Meaning , rev. ed. (New York: Pocket Books, 1997). A great help
in gaining equanimity , this is a worthwhile read for anyone facing a crisis. Few books can give
you perspective like this one (and in so few pages).
Christopher K. Germer , The Mindful Path to Self-Compassion: Fr eeing Y ourself fr om Destructive
Thoughts and Emotions  (New York: Guilford Press, 2009). A great resource if you’d like to focus
on self-compassion.
Adam Grant, Give and T ake: Why Helping Others Drives Our Success (New York: Viking, 2013) . A
fantastic primer on the power of altruism (pro-social behavior in technical terms).
Adam Grant, Originals: How Non-Conformists Move the W orld (New York: Viking, 2016) .
Jonathan Haidt, The Happiness Hypothesis  (New York: Basic Books, 2006). A fascinating look at the
science of happiness.
Steven C. Hayes, Get Out of Y our Mind and Into Y our Life  (Oakland, Calif.: New Harbinger
Publications, 2005). One of the very best books we have found on how to handle your own mind.
Jon Kabat-Zinn, Wher ever Y ou Go, Ther e You Are, tenth anniv . ed. (New York: Hyperion, 2005). The
best introduction to mindfulness we have yet found. Just the introduction and first two chapters
will already give you a breakthrough or two.
Hal Stone and Sidra Stone, Embracing Y our Inner Critic: T urning Self-Criticism into a Cr eative Asset
(New York: HarperOne, 1993). A great first start on getting to know the inner critic, and an easy
read.
Mark Williams, John Teasdale, Zindel Segal, and Jon Kabat-Zinn, The Mindful W ay thr ough
Depr ession: Fr eeing Y ourself fr om Chr onic Unhappiness  (New York: Guilford Press, 2007). The
best of the best on this dif ficult topic. A must-read for anyone who has experienced depression or
whose loved ones have suf fered from it.
Online Resour ces
We highly recommend this five-minute journal for daily gratitude work, and this productivity planner
as a good all-around tool: www .intelligentchange.com.
Check out Annie Duke’ s courses covering decision strategy and critical thinking at annieduke.com.
Visit www .TheButterfly .net to access free downloadable content, audio recordings of many
visualization exercises, and much more to help you get the most out of this book.
Speaking Engagements
Olivia and Judah are frequently requested keynote speakers, seminar leaders, and facilitators for
executive leadership retreats. To book either of them for a speaking engagement, view highlights
of live keynote speeches or learn about their topics of expertise, visit www .TheButterfly .net or
contact them via e-mail at speaking@thebutterfly .net.

--- PAGE 253 ---
Coaching and Consulting
For a more intensive or in-depth experience tailored to you or your or ganization’ s specific needs, you
may also want to explore Olivia and Judah’ s extensive coaching and consulting practice, which
has attracted clients such as Google, Deloitte, and the U.S. Army Special Forces. You will find
more information at www .TheButterfly .net.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 254 ---
Acknowledgments
Over the past four years of researching and working on the book, we have
had the great privilege of being guided by our science advisers:
neuroscientists Dr . Kalina Christof f, Dr. John Kounios, Dr . Jonathan
Schooler , and oxytocin expert Dr . Paul Zak; psychiatrists Dr . John Beebe,
Dr. Jon Lief f, and Dr . Srini Pillay; biochemist Dr . Joseph Or gel; physical
chemist Dr . Andrew Ouderkirk; systems scientist Dr . Dario Nardi; and
theoretical physicist Dr . Geof frey West.
To the many experts who have shared their experience and insights, and
whose contributions will feature in our upcoming book on breakthrough
organizations: Michael Arena, David Arkness, Gilles August, Patricia
Carson, Pablo Cohn, Andrew Douglass, Regina Dugan, Alan Fine, Ken
Gabriel, Dr . Temple Grandin, Dr . Eric Grigsby , David Hall, Courtney
Hohne, Maggie Hsu, Andy Hunt Sara Johnson, Reg Kelly , Lisa Kimball,
Michelle Kreger , Dr. Greg Maguire, Mark Monroe, Darya Pilram, Razz,
Ron Ricci, David Shearer , Craig Silverstein, Vytus Sunspiral, Mary Uhl-
Bien, Don Vaughn, and Jason Apollo Voss.
We would like to thank our contributors: Jennefer English, Kelly
Lehman, Andrew Pederson, Kristin Posehn, Brian Sharp, Stephanie Sharp,
Victoria Spadaro-Grant, Jef f Thomson, and Jef f Williams.
And the many reviewers whose comments provided great value: Linda
Anderman, Safi Bahcall, Paul Bartley , Jennifer Basco, Kyle Bellin, Ali
Binazir , Michael Burkett, Melanie Carter , Eric Cohen, Bob Covello, David
Desrochers, Franziska Deutsch, Danielle Dudum, Aaron Emigh, Debbie
Falconer , Karen Fannin, Nathalie Felëus, Ella Frank, Paul Grew , Beth
Hatchel, Doug Hathaway , Kaily Heitz, Teresa Jones, Jerry Keenan, Jef f
Kleeman, Glenn Leifheit, Janet Lim, Mehul Mandania, Amy Merrill, Eden

--- PAGE 255 ---
Moafy , Derek O’Leary , Henry Petty , Laurence Piubello-Coqueron, Dom
Ricci, Saumitra Saha, Courtney Strobel Salazar , Tammy Sanders, Kevin
Sauer , Ray Schmitz, Holleigh Schoors, Oscar Serra, John Shamber g, Felicia
Spahr , Ken Shubin Stein, Daiki Sueyoshi, Jordan Thibodeau, Robin Turner ,
Bart Volger , Adrian Weekes, Ben Weston, and Mike Zwiefelhofer .
With great skill, dedication, patience, kindness, and generosity , Niki
Papadopoulos and Leah Trouwborst led Penguin’ s impressive team ef fort.
Our most profound thanks to our Super Agent Jim Levine, for his
wisdom, insight, and experience, his guidance and humor , and for knowing
us so well.
Olivia Would Like to Give Thanks . . .
To four remarkable women: Carina Levintof f, Catya Martin, Elisabeth
Puissant, and Natalie Risacher . Ladies, it all started with you.
To the mentors and teachers whose wisdom guided me along the path:
Tina and Mitch Beranbaum, Tara Brach, David and Shoshana Cooper , Leil
Lowndes, and Victoria Moran.
To my family and extended family: Guillaume, Marine, Ernie, and the
entire Cabane clan; Dave and Doris Schoenfarber; the wonderful Bradoos;
Barney Pell and Nadya Direkova; Devon and Pablo Cohn; Ana and Michael
McCullough; Ava Reich and John Rigney; Serafim Batztoglou and Katya
Stanton; Ruth Owades; Tom Breur .
To those who have kept me healthy and sane, supplying friendship,
encouragement, caf feine, or a haven to work in: Alex Maki-Jokela; Joel
Kraut; Ian Price; Semira Rahemtulla; Fernando Diaz and Vince Beaudet;
Shauna Mei; Catherine Pernot; Kushal Chakrabarti; Steven Puri; Mark
Herschber g; David, Brooke, Lenore, Dan, and Asa; Todd and Elaine; Tynan;
and the entire games and chocolate gang.
To Marissa Mayer and Zack Bogue, who kindly took an unknown
author under their wing, way back when, and whose patronage made such a
difference. Thank you both.
I would also like to dedicate this book to my clients, as together we’ve
shared discoveries, confessions, laughter , struggles, triumphs, pride, and
joy. I’m looking forward to continuing our journey together .

--- PAGE 256 ---
To Fabian Cuntze, who first suggested that Judah and I collaborate.
And, of course, to Judah, for your wisdom and your guidance, for being the
voice of reason and saving my sanity more times than I can count.
To my husband, Brian, for frozen marshmallows and fresh coconuts,
and to Devon Cohn, Natalie Philips, and Sunita de Tourreil. You each own a
piece of my heart.
Judah Would Like to Give Thanks . . .
To my coauthor and dear friend, Olivia. Thank you for overcoming our
mutual introversion and saying hi at that party that night, the one neither of
us wanted to go to. It’ s been a fascinating ride.
To my friends in the army for teaching me more than a civilian has a
right to know: Mark Monroe, Razz, Mike Rogan, JB, Patricia Carson,
Darya Pilram, Dave Horan, Phillip Pattee, Angela DiGiosaf fatte, Dan
Hoeprich, R yan Kranc, and Mike Loveall. To Dana Pittard for your
reflection and insight.
To the OD masters of innovation and systems and the human variable
within them: Regina Dugan, Ken Gabriel, Geof frey West, Ron Ricci,
Michael Arena, Mary Uhl-Bien, Lisa Kimball.
To Sara Johnson, for your kindness, intelligence, and willingness to tell
me what’ s going on. To Cami Clark, for the future sight and conversations
and laughter at the unbelievable come true.
To Dario Nardi, for your insights into the brain and personality . To John
Beebe, for the lunches and for answering all my questions and for your
encouragement to explore the entirety of one’ s personality . To Daniel
Shapiro, for your friendship and humble brilliance, my brother from another
mother . To Whitney Hirschier , for telling it like it is, never being fooled by
the fools, and your true soul.
To the boys in the Lab for listening to me vent: Alex, Andrew , Vadik,
Sergey, Keaton, Greg, Andrei and Andrey , and Cameron. And to Wren, for
your smiles and joy . To Joe, for listening and for the genius cover design we
didn’ t use. And to Esther , for the dim sum and knowing glance.
To Christos, the mystic, and Lieba, the seer , to Amanda, the honest one.
To the Lambies, the Italian, and the Bengali for being awesome.

--- PAGE 257 ---
To the DJs: Kem, Stickybeats, Rus, Dave “MoFo” Simon, BettyRay ,
Mo Corleone, LeftCtrl, kev/null, Derek R yan, Aaron Dyson Xavier , Adi
Shanti, Ghost Squadron. To Nachi the magnificent.
To my teachers: Isa, the edge runner; Lori, the healer; and Rosenber g,
the trickster . To Nicole W. for hanging at the rest stops on the journey .
And to so much family: Dr . Pants, Soul Sisters Katester and Darci, Soul
Brothers Dov and Allan, and Allison, the best bike passenger ever Eyla T.,
my parents; and the coven, Meg the body , Sera the soul, and Tara the heart.
And always to Tara, for ravishing my heart. So much love.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 258 ---
Notes
Introduction
 1. Drawn from Albert Einstein’ s talks, letters, and the recollections of his son, Hans Albert. See
Dennis Overbye, Einstein in Love: A Scientific Romance  (New York: Penguin, 2001).
 2. Salvador Dalí, 50 Secr ets of Magic Craftmanship  (New York: Dover , 1948), 36–37.
 3. Randy L. Buckner , Jessica R. Andrews‐Hanna, and Daniel L. Schacter , “The Brain’ s Default
Network,” Annals of the New Y ork Academy of Sciences  1124, no. 1 (2008): 1–38.
 4. Aaron Kucyi, Michael J. Hove, Michael Esterman, R. Matthew Hutchison, and Eve M. Valera,
“Dynamic Brain Network Correlates of Spontaneous Fluctuations in Attention,” Cerebral
Cortex  (2016): bhw029.
 5. John Stachel, “‘What Song the Syrens Sang’: How Did Einstein Discover Special Relativity?,”
in Einstein fr om ‘B’  to ‘Z’, vol. 9 (Heidelber g: Springer Science & Business Media, 2001), 157.
 6. Claire Suddath, “A  Brief History of: Velcro,” Time, June 15, 2010.
 7. Wilson Greatbatch, The Making of the Pacemaker: Celebrating a Lifesaving Invention
(Amherst, New York: Prometheus Books, 2000).
Chapter  1: The Four  Wings
 1. Györ gy Moldova, Ballpoint: A Tale of Genius and Grit, Perilous T imes, and the Invention That
Changed the W ay W e Write (n.p.: New Europe Books, 2012).
 2. Martha Beck, “7 Ways to Spark a Major Breakthrough in Your Life,” O Magazine , August 2014.
 3. Amanda L. Boston and Lisa Bur gess, “Helo Mechanics Draw Praise for NASCAR-Inspired
Windshield Coatings,” Stars and Stripes, March 6, 2005.
 4. William Rosen, The Most Powerful Idea in the W orld: A Story of Steam, Industry and Invention
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2012), 137.
 5. Robin McKie, “James Watt and the Sabbath Stroll That Created the Industrial Revolution,”
Guar dian,  May 29, 2015.
 6. Stephen S. Hall, “The Age of Electricity ,” in Inventors and Discover ers: Changing Our W orld,
ed. Elizabeth L. Newhouse (W ashington, D.C.: National Geographic Society , 1988).
 7. Electronic correspondence with Victoria Spadaro Grant, July–September 2016.

--- PAGE 259 ---
 8. Joe Grif fin and Ivan Tyrrell, Why W e Dream: The Definitive Answer  (Hailsham, U.K.: HG
Publishing, 2014).
 9. Thomas Waln-Mor gan Draper , The Bemis History and Genealogy: Being an Account, in Gr eater
Part, of the Descendants of Joseph Bemis of W atertown, Mass. (Washington, D.C.: Library of
Congress, n.d.), 159–62, 1357 Joshua Bemis, FHL  Microfilm 101 1936 Item 2.
 10. GreenerDesign Staf f, “Oyster Glue Could Hold Secret to Safer Sur gery,” GreenBiz,  September
22, 2010.
 11. Tom D. Crouch, “On Wheels and Wings,” Inventors and Discover ers: Changing Our W orld.
 12. Tom Wolfe, The Right Stuff (New York: Farrar , Straus and Giroux, 1979).
 13. Private conversations and e-mails with Tammy Sanders, January–March 2014.
 14. Hall, “The Age of Electricity ,” Inventors and Discover ers: Changing Our W orld.
 15. John Stachel, “‘What Song the Syrens Sang’: How Did Einstein Discover Special Relativity?,”
in Einstein fr om ‘B’  to ‘Z’, vol. 9 (Heidelber g: Springer Science & Business Media, 2001), 157.
 16. Private communication with Dr . Barney Pell.
Chapter  2: The Chrysalis
 1. Stacey Anderson, “When Keith Richards Wrote ‘(I Can’ t Get No) Satisfaction’  in His Sleep,”
Rolling Stone , May 9, 201 1, www .rollingstone.com/music/news/when-keith-richards-wrote-i-
cant-get-no-satisfaction-in-his-sleep-201 10509.
 2. Discussions and interviews with Dr . Kalina Christof f, head of the Cognitive Neuroscience of
Thought Laboratory at the University of British Columbia; Roger E. Beaty , Mathias Benedek,
Scott Barry Kaufman, and Paul J. Silvia, “Default and Executive Network Coupling Supports
Creative Idea Production,” Scientific Reports  5 (2015); Kieran C. R. Fox, R. Nathan Spreng,
Melissa Ellamil, Jessica R. Andrews-Hanna, and Kalina Christof f, “The Wandering Brain: Meta-
Analysis of Functional Neuroimaging Studies of Mind-W andering and Related Spontaneous
Thought Processes,” Neur oimage  111 (2015): 61 1–21; Melissa Ellamil, Charles Dobson, Mark
Beeman, and Kalina Christof f, “Evaluative and Generative Modes of Thought During the
Creative Process,” Neur oimage  59, no. 2 (2012): 1783–94.
 3. Steven L. Bressler and Vinod Menon, “Lar ge-Scale Brain Networks in Cognition: Emer ging
Methods and Principles,” Trends in Cognitive Sciences  14 (2010), 277–90.
 4. Randy L. Buckner , Jessica R. Andrews‐Hanna, and Daniel L. Schacter , “The Brain’ s Default
Network,” Annals of the New Y ork Academy of Sciences  1124, no. 1 (2008): 1–38; also
discussions with Dr . Marcus Raichle, Dr . Jonathan Schooler , Dr. John Kounius, and Dr . Kalina
Christof f.
 5. Conversations with Dr . Marcus Raichle, 2012–16. “I’ve never seen anyone suf fer damage to that
part of the brain from a stroke and survive.” Every mammal down to the mouse has been found
to have a default network. It has two blood supplies, a form of redundancy found in vital parts
like the heart and the liver .
 6. H. Ber ger, “Über das Elektr enkephalogramm des Menschen, ” Archiv Für Psychiatrie Und
Nervenkrankheiten 87 (1929): 527–70. Ber ger demonstrated that the human brain remains
electrically active even at rest while attention wanders.
 7. Conversation with Dr . Marcus Raichle, March 2014.
 8. The salience network is a network of regions that, among other things, focus our attention on the
most salient information at any time. This network has been found to actually direct our
attention either to people, facts, or events outside of, external to us, or to things happening inside
of us. It mediates between our EN and our DN. It consists of the anterior insula (AI) and dorsal
anterior cingulate cortex (dACC), the amygdala, the ventral striatum, and the substantia

--- PAGE 260 ---
nigra/ventral tegmental area. Things that catch the salience network’ s eye include anything out
of the ordinary , anything that breaks a pattern, anything surprising, pleasurable, rewarding,
relevant to the self, or engaging the emotions. See Vinod Menon and Lucina Q. Uddin,
“Saliency , Switching, Attention and Control: A Network Model of Insula Function,” Brain
Structur e and Function  214, no. 5–6 (2010): 655–67.
 9. O. T. Benfey , “August Kekulé and the Birth of the Structural Theory of Or ganic Chemistry in
1858,” Journal of Chemical Education , 35 (1958): 21–23. doi:10.1021/ed035p21.
 10. Conversations with Adam Cheyer , August 2014.
 11. Kieran C. R. Fox, Savannah Nijeboer , Elizaveta Solomonova, G. William Domhof f, and Kalina
Christof f, “Dreaming as Mind Wandering: Evidence from Functional Neuroimaging and First-
Person Content Reports,” Frontiers in Human Neur oscience  7 (2013): 412.
 12. Conversations with Jef f Hawkins, September 2014.
 Chapter  3: On the Hunt
 1. Matt Kaplan, “Why Great Ideas Come When You Aren’ t Trying: Allowing the Mind to Wander
Aids Creativity ,” Natur e, May 22, 2012. www .nature.com/news/why-great-ideas-come-when-
you-aren-t-trying-1.10678.
 2. Randy L. Buckner , Jessica R. Andrews‐Hanna, and Daniel L. Schacter , “The Brain’ s Default
Network,” Annals of the New Y ork Academy of Sciences  1124, no. 1 (2008): 1–38.
 3. Kimberly D. Elsbach and Andrew B. Har gadon, “Enhancing Creativity Through ‘Mindless’
Work: A Framework of Workday Design,” Organization Science  17, no. 4 (2006): 470–83.
 4. R. Wilkins, D. Hodges, P . Laurienti, M. Steen, M., and J. Burdette, “Network Science and the
Effects of Music Preference on Functional Brain Connectivity: From Beethoven to Eminem,”
Natur e Scientific Reports  (2014), doi:10.1038/srep06130.
 5. Conversation with Dr . Kalina Christof f, based on her research. See also Science Appendix.
 6. While at Stanford University’ s Graduate School of Education, Marily Oppezzo and colleague
Daniel L. Schwartz, PhD, conducted studies involving 176 people, mostly college students.
They found that those who walked instead of sitting or being pushed in a wheelchair
consistently gave more creative responses on tests commonly used to measure creative thinking,
such as thinking of alternate uses for common objects and coming up with original analogies to
capture complex ideas. When asked to solve problems with a single answer , however , the
walkers fell slightly behind those who responded while sitting, according to the study . Marily
Oppezzo and Daniel L. Schwartz, “Give Your Ideas Some Legs: The Positive Ef fect of Walking
on Creative Thinking,” Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory , and Cognition
40, no. 4 (2014): 1 142.
 7. Dan Rubinstein, Born to W alk: The T ransformative Power of a Pedestrian Act (Toronto: ECW
Press, 2015).
 8. Kirk I. Erickson, Michelle W. Voss, Ruchika Shaurya Prakash, Chandramallika Basak, Amanda
Szabo, Laura Chaddock, Jennifer S. Kim, et al., “Exercise Training Increases Size of
Hippocampus and Improves Memory ,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences  108,
no. 7 (201 1): 3017–22.
 9. Fernando Gómez-Pinilla, Zhe Ying, Roland R. Roy , Raf faella Molteni, and V. Reggie Edgerton,
“Voluntary Exercise Induces a BDNF-Mediated Mechanism That Promotes Neuroplasticity ,”
Journal of Neur ophysiology  88, no. 5 (2002): 2187–95.
 10. Oppezzo and Schwartz, “Give Your Ideas Some Legs: The Positive Ef fect of Walking on
Creative Thinking.”

--- PAGE 261 ---
 11. Alex Soojung-Kim Pang, The Distraction Addiction: Getting the Information Y ou Need and the
Communication Y ou W ant, W ithout Enraging Y our Family , Annoying Y our Colleagues, and
Destr oying Y our Soul (New York: Little Brown, 2013), 198–215.
 12. For all subsequent references to Mason Currey’ s work: Mason Currey , ed., Daily Rituals: How
Artists W ork (New York: Knopf, 2013).
 13. Werner Heisenber g, Physics and Philosophy: The Revolution in Modern Science  (New York:
HarperPerennial, 1958).
 14. Ibid.
 15. Leo Babauta, “The No. 1 Habit of Highly Creative People,” zen habits, May 27, 2010,
zenhabits.net/creative-habit.
 16. Ibid.
 17. Orrin E. Dunlap Jr ., “Tesla Sees Evidence That Radio and Light Are Sound,” New Y ork T imes,
April 8, 1934, 9.
 18. M.P .M. Kammers, Frederique de Vignemont, Lennart Verhagen, and H. Chris Dijkerman, “The
Rubber Hand Illusion in Action,” Neur opsychologia  47, no. 1 (2009): 204–1 1.
 19. Angela K.-Y . Leung, Suntae Kim, Evan Polman, Lay See Ong, Lin Qiu, Jack A. Goncalo, and
Jeffrey Sanchez-Burks, “Embodied Metaphors and Creative ‘Acts,’” Psychological Science  23,
no. 5 (2012): 502–9.
 20. Quote from Dean Hovey , designer of the original Apple mouse, from the PBS documentary
Steve Jobs:  One Last Thing (2012: London: Pioneer Productions).
 21. Private correspondence with Kevin Sauer , July–August 2016.
 22. Peter Biskind, Easy Riders, Raging Bulls  (New York: Simon & Schuster , 1998).
Chapter  4: The Butterfly Pr ocess
 1. Gary Wolf, “Steve Jobs: The Next Insanely Great Thing,” Wired, February 1, 1996.
 2. W. C. Klann, “Reminiscences,” Henry Ford Museum & Greenfield Village Archives, n.d..
Accession 65.
 3. No one is positive whether the use of rifling with feathers on arrows was the inspiration for
rifling the inside of a gun barrel, but most people agree that given the overlap of projectiles used
in war and hunting and both methods’  need for accuracy , it is the most plausible explanation.
 4. John R. Scherer , “Before Cardiac MRI: Rene Laennec (1781–1826) and the Invention of the
Stethoscope,” Cardiology Journal  14, no. 5 (2007): 518–19, PMID 18651515; R.T .H. Laennec,
De l’Auscultation Médiate ou T raité du Diagnostic des Maladies des Poumons et du Coeur
(Paris: Brosson & Chaudé, 1819). The complete title of this book, often referred to as the
“Treatise,” is On Mediate Auscultation or T reatise on the Diagnosis of the Diseases of the Lungs
and Heart.
 5. J. K. Lee, K. A. Grace, and A. J. Taylor , “Effect of a Pharmacy Care Program on Medication
Adherence and Persistence, Blood Pressure, and Low-Density Lipoprotein Cholesterol: A
Randomized Controlled Trial,” Journal of the American Medical Association 296, no. 21
(2006): 2563–71, doi:10.1001/jama.296.21.joc60162.
 6. Ibid.; N. Col, J. E. Fanale, and P . Kronholm, “The Role of Medication Noncompliance and
Adverse Drug Reactions in Hospitalizations of the Elderly ,” Archives of Internal Medicine  150
(1990):841–45; M. C. Sokol, K. A. McGuigan, R. R. Verbrugge, and R. S. Epstein, “Impact of
Medication Adherence on Hospitalization Risk and Healthcare Cost,” Medical Car e 43 (2005):
521–30.
 7. Interviews with T. J. Parker , May 2015.
 8. Charlie Connell, “Did Thomas Edison Invent the Tattoo Machine?,” Inked,  December 18, 2014.

--- PAGE 262 ---
 9. Anna Winston, “French Designers Hack a 3D Printer to Make a Tattooing Machine,” Dezeen,
October 28, 2014.
 10. Daniel E. Slotnik, “T om Sims, Pioneer in Sport of Snowboarding, Dies at 61,” New Y ork
Times,  September 18, 2012.
 11. This ar gument was made by Robert D. Ekelund, Robert F , Hébert, Robert D. Tollison, Gary M.
Anderson, and Audrey B. Davidson, Sacred Trust: The Medieval Chur ch as an Economic Firm
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1996).
 12. William C. Taylor , “What Hospitals Can Learn from the Ritz,” Fortune,  March 2, 201 1.
Chapter  5: Cultivating Your Garden
 1. Erik Weihenmayer , Touch the T op of the W orld: A Blind Man’ s Journey to Climb Farther Than
the Eye Can See  (New York: Plume, 2002), and many , many articles, including a Time magazine
cover .
 2. Mandy Kendrick, “T asting the Light: Device Lets the Blind ‘See’  with Their Tongues,”
Scientific American , August 13, 2009, accessed March 15, 2014,
www .scientificamerican.com/article/device-lets-blind-see-with-tongues.
 3. Obituary , “Founder: Paul Bach-y-Rita,” Tactile Communication and Neurorehabilitation
Laboratory , Department of Biomedical Engineering, University Wisconsin-Madison, 2015,
tcnl.bme.wisc.edu/laboratory/founder .
 4. Tony T. Yang, C. C. Gallen, V. S. Ramachandran, S. Cobb, B. J. Schwartz, and F . E. Bloom,
“Noninvasive Detection of Cerebral Plasticity in Adult Human Somatosensory Cortex,”
Neur oreport: An International Journal for the Rapid Communication of Resear ch in
Neur oscience  5, no. 6 (1994), 701–4; Judy H. Song, Erica Skoe, Patrick C. M. Wong, and Nina
Kraus, “Plasticity in the Adult Human Auditory Brainstem Following Short-term Linguistic
Training,” Journal of Cognitive Neur oscience  20, no. 10 (2008), 1892–1902.
 5. Helen Thomson, “W oman of 24 Found to Have No Cerebellum in Her Brain,” New Scientist,
September 10, 2014, www .newscientist.com/article/mg22329861-900-woman-of-24-found-to-
have-no-cerebellum-in-her -brain.
 6. Christina M. Karns, Mark W. Dow , and Helen J. Neville, “Altered Cross-Modal Processing in
the Primary Auditory Cortex of Congenitally Deaf Adults: A Visual-Somatosensory fMRI Study
with a Double Flash Illusion,” Journal of Neur oscience 32, no. 28 (July 1 1, 2012), 9626–38;
Frédéric Gougoux, Robert J. Zatorre, Maryse Lassonde, Patrice Voss, and Franco Lepore, “A
Functional Neuroimaging Study of Sound Localization: Visual Cortex Activity Predicts
Performance in Early-Blind Individuals,” PLoS Biology  3, no. 2 (2005): e27.
 7. Frédéric Gougoux, Robert J. Zatorre, Maryse Lassonde, Patrice Voss, and Franco Lepore, “A
Functional Neuroimaging Study of Sound Localization: Visual Cortex Activity Predicts
Performance in Early-Blind Individuals,” PLoS Biology  3, no. 2 (2005): e27.
 8. Weihenmayer , Touch the T op of the W orld.
 9. Bogdan Draganski, Christian Gaser , Volker Busch, Gerhard Schuierer , Ulrich Bogdahn, and
Arne May , “Neuroplasticity: Changes in Grey Matter Induced by Training,” Natur e 427, no.
6972 (2004): 31 1–12; Arne May , Gören Hajak, S. Gänssbauer , Thomas Stef fens, Berthold
Langguth, Tobias Kleinjung, and Peter Eichhammer , “Structural Brain Alterations Following 5
Days of Intervention: Dynamic Aspects of Neuroplasticity ,” Cerebral Cortex  17, no. 1 (2007):
205–10.
 10. Conversations with Dr . Jon Lief f, January–March, 2015.
 11. Conversations with Astro Teller, May 2015.

--- PAGE 263 ---
 12. Jeffrey A. Kleim and Theresa A. Jones, “Principles of Experience-Dependent Neural Plasticity:
Implications for Rehabilitation After Brain Damage,” Journal of Speech, Language, and
Hearing Resear ch 51, no. 1 (2008): S225–39.
 13. Cyrus K. Foroughi, Samuel S. Monfort, Martin Paczynski, Patrick E. McKnight, and P . M.
Greenwood, “Placebo Ef fects in Cognitive Training,” Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences 113, no. 27 (2016): 7470–74; Lucinda S. Spaulding, Mark P . Mostert, and Andrea P .
Beam, “Is Brain Gym® an Ef fective Educational Intervention?,” Exceptionality  18, no. 1
(2010): 18–30; Jennifer Stephenson, “Best Practice? Advice Provided to Teachers About the Use
of Brain Gym® in Australian Schools,” Australian Journal of Education  53, no. 2 (2009): 109–
24.
 14. Sharon Eldar and Y. Bar -Haim, “Neural Plasticity in Response to Attention Training in
Anxiety ,” Psychological Medicine  40, no. 04 (2010): 667–77.
 15. Leo Babauta, “Focus: A Simplicity Manifesto in the Age of Distraction” (Grand Haven, Mich.:
Brilliance Audio, 201 1).
 16. For all subsequent references to Dr . Kelly McGonigal’ s work: Kelly McGonigal, PhD, The
Willpower Instinct  (New York: Avery, 2012), 42.
 17. Susan Burton, “T erry Gross and the Art of Opening Up,” New Y ork T imes, October 21, 2015.
 18. Aymeric Guillot, Kevin Moschber ger, and Christian Collet, “Coupling Movement with
Imagery as a New Perspective for Motor Imagery Practice,” Behavioral and Brain Functions  9,
no. 1 (2013): 1.
 19. Adapted from Italo Calvino’ s classic book Invisible Cities,  in which Marco Polo is entertaining
Kublai Khan with tales of the dif ferent and magical cities he has visited throughout the great
Khan’ s lands. Italo Calvino, Invisible Cities  (New York: Harcourt Brace, 1978).
 20. “Bicycle History from the Late 19th Century ,” America on the Move Exhibit, National
Museum of American History , Smithsonian Institution,
amhistory .si.edu/onthemove/themes/story_69_3.html.
 21. Jon Gertner , The Idea Factory: Bell Labs and the Gr eat Age of American Innovation  (New
York: Penguin, 2012).
 22. Dennis Overbye, Einstein in Love: A Scientific Romance  (New York: Penguin, 2001).
 23. Private communication with Nadya Direkova.
 24. EarthSky editors, “Sunni Robertson on How a Kingfisher Inspired a Bullet Train,” EarthSky ,
June 29, 2012.
 25. Abigail Doan, “BioMimetic Architecture: Green Building in Zimbabwe Modeled After Termite
Mounds,” Inhabitat,  November 29, 2012.
 26. Janine M. Benyus, Biomimicry: Innovation Inspir ed by Natur e (New York: William Morrow ,
2002).
 Chapter  6: What’ s in Your Net?
 1. Conversations with Sandy Pentland, October 2014.
 2. Stacey Anderson, “When Keith Richards Wrote ‘(I Can’ t Get No) Satisfaction’  in His Sleep,”
Rolling Stone , May 9, 201 1, www .rollingstone.com/music/news/when-keith-richards-wrote-i-
cant-get-no-satisfaction-in-his-sleep-201 10509.
 3. Conversations with Tom Chi, March 2014.
Chapter  7: The Spiders of Fear
 1. Interestingly , high catastrophizers report higher levels of pain and may even dif fer in their
physical neuroanatomy . See Claudia M. Campbell, Kenny Witmer , Mpepera Simango, Alene

--- PAGE 264 ---
Carteret, Marco L. Loggia, James N. Campbell, Jennifer A. Haythornthwaite, and Robert R.
Edwards, “Catastrophizing Delays the Analgesic Ef fect of Distraction,” PAIN®  149, no. 2
(2010): 202–7; A new study reports: “Our data provide evidence that individuals who carry the
NPSR1 T allele over -interpret their conditioned fear reactions compared with non-T  carriers,”
Karolina A Raczka, Nina Gartmann, Marie-Luise Mechias, Andreas Reif, Christian Büchel,
Jürgen Deckert, and Raf fael Kalisch, “A  Neuropeptide S Receptor Variant Associated with
Overinterpretation of Fear Reactions: A Potential Neurogenetic Basis for Catastrophizing,”
Molecular Psychiatry  15, no. 1 1 (2010): 1067–74.
 2. Rick Hanson, PhD, “Do Positive Experiences Stick to Your Ribs?,” Take in the Good , June 1,
2015, www .rickhanson.net/take-in-the-good.
 3. Private correspondence with Adam Berman, 2010–12.
 4. More precisely: specific areas of our brain are used for both experiencing and imagining, and
this economical use of the brain has the side ef fect of provoking some of the emotions of the
real experience.
 5. This ef fect is so powerful that athletes have found you can actually gain muscle mass through
imagination. Erin M. Shackell, Lionel G. Standing, “Mind Over Matter: Mental Training
Increases Physical Strength,” North American Journal of Psychology 9, no. 1 (2007): 189–200.
 6. For more on this topic, we enthusiastically recommend Robert Sapolsky’ s work, including his
iTunes lecture, “Why Zebras Don’ t Get Ulcers.”
 7. Gretchen Cuda, “Just Breathe: Body Has a Built-in Stress Reliever ,” NPR, Morning Edition ,
December 6, 2010.
 8. Private correspondence with Dr . Philippe Goldin, 2013.
 9. David Rock, “SCARF: A Brain-Based Model for Collaborating With and Influencing Others,”
Neur oLeadership Journal 1 (2008).
 10. Leonardo C. De Souza, Henrique C. Guimarães, Antônio L. Teixeira, Paulo Caramelli, Richard
Levy , Bruno Dubois, and Emmanuelle Volle, “Frontal Lobe Neurology and the Creative Mind,”
Frontiers in Psychology  5 (2014); Bruce L. Miller , Kyle Boone, Jef frey L. Cummings, Stephen
L. Read, and Fred Mishkin, “Functional Correlates of Musical and Visual Ability in
Frontotemporal Dementia,” British Journal of Psychiatry  176, no. 5 (2000): 458–63; Bruce L.
Miller , Marcel Ponton, D. Frank Benson, J. L. Cummings, and I. Mena, “Enhanced Artistic
Creativity with Temporal Lobe Degeneration,” Lancet  348, no. 9043 (1996): 1744–45; Bruce L.
Miller , J. Cummings, F . Mishkin, K. Boone, F. Prince, M. Ponton, and C. Cotman, “Emer gence
of Artistic Talent in Frontotemporal Dementia,” Neur ology  51, no. 4 (1998): 978–82.
 11. John Martyn Harlow , “Recovery from the Passage of an Iron Bar through the Head,”
Publications of the Massachusetts Medical Society 2, no. 3 (1868): 327–47 (Boston: David
Clapp & Son, 1869, repr .).
 12. “A Most Remarkable Case,” American Phr enological Journal and Repository of Science,
Literatur e, and General Intelligence, Fowler & Wells 13, no. 4 (April 1851): 89, col. 3.
 13. P. R. Clance and S. A. Imes, “The Imposter Phenomenon in High Achieving Women:
Dynamics and Therapeutic Intervention,” Psychotherapy: Theory , Resear ch and Practice  15, no.
3 (1978): 241–47.
 14. In more technical terms, Robert Cialdini defines the self-image as a characterological view of
the self formed through feedback that we get. Being successful on the physical field, we can
gain a self-image of ourselves as athletes. Experiencing an internal feeling of anxiety when
going to a party might reinforce the notion that “I am a shy person.” Feedback we receive from
others, who give us approval or disapproval, will also be integrated into the self-image. Private
conversation with Robert Cialdini, 2015–16.

--- PAGE 265 ---
 15. Microsoft’ s imposter syndrome blog is available at
www .hanselman.com/blog/ImAPhonyAreY ou.aspx.
 16. Teresa Amabile and Steven J. Kramer , “The Power of Small Wins,” Harvar d Business Review ,
May 201 1.
 17. Brain scans show that remembering something turns on the same “circuits” in the brain as the
original experience. The study , using MRI scanners, was the most detailed yet into how similar
“reliving” an experience was to experiencing it in the first place. The scientists found that the
real and remembered versions had “striking” similarities, with 91 percent of the same brain
circuits activating. “When we mentally replay an episode we’ve experienced, it can feel like we
are transported back in time and re-living that moment again,“ said Dr . Brad Buchsbaum, lead
investigator . “Our study has confirmed that complex, multi-featured memory involves a ‘repeat’
of the whole pattern of brain activity that is evoked during initial perception of the experience.
This helps to explain why vivid memory can feel so real.” Researchers found that vivid memory
and real experience share “striking” similarities at the neural level, although they are not “pixel-
perfect” brain pattern replications. The two cognitive operations don’ t work exactly the same
way in the brain—hence, even the most vivid memories don’ t “fool” us into thinking we are
actually there. Bradley R. Buchsbaum, Sabrina Lemire-Rodger , Candice Fang, and Hervé Abdi,
“The Neural Basis of Vivid Memory Is Patterned on Perception,” Journal of Cognitive
Neur oscience 24, no. 9 (2012): 1867–83, doi: 10.1 162/jocn_a_00253.
 18. Private conversations with Tara Brach.
 19. Ellen Langer , Counter clockwise  (New York: Random House, 2012).
 20. Private communication and correspondence with Robert Cialdini, 2015–16.
 21. Charles Duhigg, The Power of Habit  (New York: Random House, 2014).
 22. For all subsequent references to B. J. Fogg’ s work: Private communications and electronic
correspondence with B. J. Fogg, 2015–16.
 23. Private correspondence with Dr . Philippe Goldin, 2009–10.
 24. Martha Beck, Finding Y our Own North Star  (New York: Harmony Books, 2002).
 25. Stanley Milgram, Obedience to Authority: An Experimental V iew (New York: Harper & Row ,
1975); N. J. Russell, “Milgram’ s Obedience to Authority Experiments: Origins and Early
Evolution,” British Journal of Social Psychology 50, part 1 (201 1): 140–62.
 26. Considered by many the greatest hitter of all time, Babe Ruth only managed to get a hit of any
kind 34 percent of the time. In his career , Michael Jordan took 24,537 shots. He missed 12,345
times. You may as well have flipped a coin. He was just as likely to fail. Adapted from
Benjamin Morris, fivethirtyeight.com.
 27. From Tom Hanks interview in “Kevin Pollack’ s Chat Show” podcast, December 13, 2013.
 28. John Varrasi, “The Man Behind the Vacuum Cleaner ,” ASME, December 201 1; Nadia
Goodman, “James Dyson on Using Failure to Drive Success,” Entrepreneur , November 5, 2012;
John Seabrook, “How to Make It,” New Y orker , September 20, 2012.
 29. For more on the principle of scarcity , see Robert Cialdini’ s excellent Influence: The
Psychology of Persuasion  (New York: HarperBusiness, rev . ed., 2006).
 30. Private communications and electronic correspondence with Robert Cialdini regarding the
combined ef fect of the principles of social proof and authority .
 31. Barry Schwartz, The Paradox of Choice: Why Mor e Is Less  (New York: HarperCollins, 2005).
 32. Ibid.
 33. D. R. Carney , A.J.C. Cuddy , and A. J. Yap, “Power Posing: Brief Nonverbal Displays Affect
Neuroendocrine Levels and Risk Tolerance,” Psychological Science OnlineFirst, September 21,
2010.

--- PAGE 266 ---
 34. Benson is the Director Emeritus of the Benson-Henry Institute (BHI), and Mind Body
Medicine Professor of Medicine, Harvard Medical School.
 35. The results revealed significant changes in the expression of several important groups of genes
between the novice samples and those from both the short- and long-term sets. Even more
pronounced changes were shown in the long-term practitioners. Manoj K. Bhasin, Jef fery A.
Dusek, Bei-Hung Chang, Marie G. Joseph, John W. Denninger , Gregory L. Fricchione, Herbert
Benson, and Towia A. Libermann, “Relaxation Response Induces Temporal Transcriptome
Changes in Ener gy Metabolism, Insulin Secretion and Inflammatory Pathways,” PLoS One  8,
no. 5 (2013): e62817.
 36. R. A. Emmons and A. Mishra, “Why Gratitude Enhances Well-Being: What We Know , What
We Need to Know ,” in Designing Positive Psychology: T aking Stock and Moving Forwar d, ed.
K. Sheldon, T. Kashdan and M. F . Steger (New York: Oxford University Press, 201 1), 248–58;
R. A. Emmons, “Gratitude,” in Encyclopedia of Positive Psychology , ed. S. J. Lopez and A.
Beauchamp (New York: Oxford University Press, 2009), 442–47.
 37. Robert A. Emmons, PhD,  Thanks! How Practicing Gratitude Can Make Y ou Happier  (New
York: Houghton Mif flin, 2007); Alex M. Wood, John Maltby , Raphael Gillett, P . Alex Linley ,
and Stephen Joseph, “The Role of Gratitude in the Development of Social Support, Stress, and
Depression: Two Longitudinal Studies,” Journal of Resear ch in Personality  42, no. 4 (August
2008): 854–71.
 38. For more on this subject, see Olivia’ s book The Charisma Myth  (New York: Portfolio, 2012).
 39. Roy F . Baumeister and Brad J. Bushman, Social Psychology and Human Natur e (Boston:
Cengage Learning, 2014), 196; P . Brickman, R. Janof f-Bulman, and D. Coates, “Lottery
Winners and Accident Victims: Is Happiness Relative?” Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology 36, no. 8 (1978), 917–27.
 40. Geor ge Hill, the Story Corps Project, storycorps.or g/listen/geor ge-hill.
 41. Andrew Hunt, Pragmatic Thinking and Learning: Refactor Y our W etwar e (Raleigh, N.C.:
Pragmatic Bookshelf, rev . ed. 2010).
 42. Cialdini, Influence ; B. J. Sagarin, R. B. Cialdini, W. E. Rice, and S. B. Serna, “Dispelling the
Illusion of Invulnerability: The Motivations and Mechanisms of Resistance to Persuasion,”
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 83, no. 3 (2002): 526–41.
 43. Hunt, Pragmatic Thinking and Learning.
 44. Bill Bryson, A Short History of Nearly Everything  (New York: Broadway Books, 2004), 1 1.
 45. Darya L. Zabellina and Michael D. Robinson, “Don’ t Be So Hard on Yourself: Self-
Compassion Facilitates Creative Originality Among Self-Judgmental Individuals,” Creativity
Resear ch Journal  22, no. 3 (2010): 288–93.
 46. Communications with Dr . JoAnn Dahlkoetter , 2014–15.
 47. K. D. Nef f, “Self-Compassion,” in Handbook of Individual Differ ences in Social Behavior , ed.
M. R. Leary and R. H. Hoyle (New York: Guilford Press, 2009), 561–73.
 48. K. D. Nef f, “Self-Compassion, Self-Esteem, and Well-Being,” Social and Personality Compass
5 (201 1): 1–12; K. D. Ne and P . McGeehee, “Self-Compassion and Psychological Resilience
among Adolescents and Young Adults,” Self and Identity 9 (2010): 225–40; K. D. Nef f, K.
Kirkpatrick, and S. S. Rude, “Self-Compassion and Its Link to Adaptive Psychological
Functioning,” Journal of Resear ch in Personality 41 (2007): 139–54.
 49. K. D. Nef f, “Self-Compassion.”
 50. Ibid. Self-compassion deactivates the threat system (which generates feelings of fear ,
insecurity , and defensiveness) and activates the soothing system instead.
 51. T. Barnhofer , T. Chittka, H. Nightingale, C. Visser, and C. Crane, “State Ef fects of Two Forms
of Meditation on Prefrontal EEG Asymmetry in Previously Depressed Individuals,” Mindfulness

--- PAGE 267 ---
1, no. 1 (2010): 21–27; T. Barnhofer , D. Duggan, C. Crane, S. Hepburn, M. J. Fennell, and J. M.
Williams, “Ef fects of Meditation on Frontal Alpha-Asymmetry in Previously Suicidal
Individuals,” Neur oReport 18, no. 7 (2007): 709–12; B. R. Cahn and J. Polich, “Meditation
States and Traits: EEG, ERP , and Neuroimaging Studies,” Psychological Bulletin 132, no. 2
(2006): 180–21 1; G. Feldman, J. Greeson, and J. Senville, “Dif ferential Ef fects of Mindful
Breathing, Progressive Muscle Relaxation, and Loving-Kindness Meditation on Decentering
and Negative Reactions to Repetitive Thoughts,” Behaviour Resear ch and Therapy 48, no. 10
(2010): 1002–1 1; A. Manna, A. Raf fone, M. G. Perrucci, D. Nardo, A. Ferretti, A. Tartaro, et al.,
“Neural Correlates of Focused Attention and Cognitive Monitoring in Meditation,” Brain
Resear ch Bulletin 82, nos. 1–2 (2010): 46–56.
 52. Christopher K. Germer , The Mindful Path to Self-Compassion  (New York: Guilford Press,
2009).
 53. Paul Gilbert, Mark W. Baldwin, Chris Irons, Jodene R. Baccus, and Michelle Palmer , “Self-
Criticism and Self-W armth: An Imagery Study Exploring Their Relation to Depression,”
Journal of Cognitive Psychotherapy 20, no. 2 (2006): 183–200.
Chapter  8: The Failur e Wasps
 1. James J. Gross, “Emotion Regulation: Affective, Cognitive, and Social Consequences,”
Psychophysiology 39, no. 3 (May 2002): 281–9.
 2. Ibid., 289.
 3. Carol Dweck, Mindset: The New Psychology of Success  (New York: Ballantine, 2006).
 4. Elon Musk tweet: “Rocket made it to drone spaceport ship, but landed hard. Close, but no cigar
this time. Bodes well for the future tho,” January 10, 2015.
 5. Conversation with Astro Teller, March 2014.
 6. Conversation with Tina Seelig, September 2015.
 7. Randy Komisar , The Monk and the Riddle  (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Business Review Press,
2000).
 8. D. J. Simons and C. F . Chabris, “Gorillas in Our Midst: Sustained Inattentional Blindness for
Dynamic Events,” Perception 28, no. 9 (1999): 1059–74.
 9. Dr. Steven C. Hayes, Get Out of Y our Mind & Into Y our Life  (Oakland, Calif.: New Harbinger
Publications, 2005).
 10. For all subsequent references to Dr . Shawn Achor ’s work: Electronic correspondence with Dr .
Shawn Achor , June–November 2014.
 11. The denial of grief reaction may have served an important purpose during our evolution, in
allowing us to escape danger . In most cases, death would come from violence: war , predation,
accident. And if you’re that close to the danger , you really shouldn’ t stop to grieve. You need to
get out of there first! So we can imagine that those of our ancestors who had this grief-denial
period tended to survive more than others, because they got out of danger and then grieved. The
others? Well, they’re not our ancestors. For more on the evolutionary advantages of grief and
depression, see Jonathan Rottenber g, The Depths (New York: Basic Books, 2014).
 12. Above four , we must engage dif ferent, slower brain processes. It takes us more time to
remember the items, and we do not remember them as accurately . Assessments of one to four
items are rapid, accurate, and confident, through a process called subitizing. As the number of
items increases beyond this amount, judgments are made with decreasing accuracy and
confidence. In addition, response times rise in a dramatic fashion. See Douglas Clements,
“Subitizing: What Is It? Why Teach It?,” Journal of the National Council of T eachers of
Mathematics  5, no. 7 (March 1999); Ernst von Glaserfeld, “Subitizing: The Role of Figural

--- PAGE 268 ---
Patterns in the Development of Numerical Concepts,” Archives de Psychologie 50 (1982): 191–
218.
 13. “Thomas Edison Quote—T infoil Phonograph ‘Something There Was No Doubt Of,’” Today in
Science History , todayinsci.com/E/Edison_Thomas/EdisonThomas-T alkingPhonograph-
SciAm.htm.
 14. Private correspondence with Dr . Andy Ouderkirk, 2010.
 15. Nathan Furr , “How Failure Taught Edison to Repeatedly Innovate,” Forbes , June 9, 201 1.
 16. For all subsequent Annie Duke quotes: Communication and correspondence with Annie Duke,
2015–16.
 17. Conversations with Matt Brady , August 2013.
Chapter  9: Icy Uncertainty
 1. Phillip G. Pattee, At W ar in Distant W aters: British Colonial Defense in the Gr eat W ar
(Annapolis, Md.: Naval Institute Press, 2013).
 2. Bartlett’ s Familiar Quotations,  ed. John Bartlett and Geof frey O’Brien (New York: Little,
Brown and Company , 2012), 707.
 3. Mason Currey , ed., Daily Rituals: How Artists W ork (New York: Knopf, 2013).
 4. For all subsequent references to Tony Schwartz: Private communications and electronic
correspondence with Tony Schwartz, 2014–15.
 5. You’ll find this free online habit-formation program at www .tinyhabits.com.
 6. Kelly McGonigal, PhD, The W illpower Instinct  (New York: Avery, 2012).
 7. M. T. Gailliot, R. F . Baumeister , C. N. DeW all, J. K. Maner , E. A. Plant, D. M. Tice, et al.,
“Self-Control Relies on Glucose as a Limited Ener gy Source: Willpower Is More Than a
Metaphor ,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 92, no. 2 (2007): 325–36.
 8. R. F . Baumeister , “Ego Depletion and Self-Regulation Failure: A Resource Model of Self-
Control,” Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental Resear ch 27, no. 2 (2003): 281–84.
 9. Eric J. Johnson and Daniel Goldstein, “Do Defaults Save Lives?,” Science 302, no. 5649 (2003):
1338–39.
 10. L. Roemer , S. M. Orsillo, and K. Salters-Pedneault, “Ef ficacy of an Acceptance-Based
Behavior Therapy for Generalized Anxiety Disorder: Evaluation in a Randomized Controlled
Trial,” Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology  76, no. 6 (December 2008): 1083–9, doi:
10.1037/a0012720. Generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) is a chronic anxiety disorder ,
associated with comorbidity and impairment in quality of life. At posttreatment assessment 78
percent of treated participants no longer met criteria for GAD and 77 percent achieved high end-
state functioning; these proportions stayed constant or increased over time.
 11. Electronic correspondence with Dr . Marie Pasinski, 2014–15.
 12. Deepak Chopra, The Seven Spiritual Laws of Success: A Practical Guide to the Fulfillment of
Your Dr eams  (San Rafael, Calif.: Amber -Allen Publishing, 2010), 20.
 13. S. Harris, S. A. Sheth, and M. S. Cohen, “Functional Neuroimaging of Belief, Disbelief, and
Uncertainty ,” Annals of Neur olology 63 (2008).
 14. Private conversation with William Bosl, 201 1. Image generation has a powerful impact on
emotions and physiological states and a high impact on brain function. See A. Hackmann,
“Working with Images in Clinical Psychology ,” in Compr ehensive Clinical Psychology , ed. A.
Bellack and M. Hersen (London: Per gamon, 1998), 301–17.
 15. T. J. Kaptchuk, E. Friedlander , J. M. Kelley , M. N. Sanchez, E. Kokkotou, et al., “Placebos
without Deception: A Randomized Controlled Trial in Irritable Bowel Syndrome,” PLoS ONE  5,
no. 12 (2010): e15591, doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0015591

--- PAGE 269 ---
 Chapter  10: The SuperT ools
 1. Nils Ringertz, “Alfred Nobel—His Life and Work”. Nobelprize.or g. Nobel Media AB 2014.
Web. September 13, 2016, http://www .nobelprize.or g/alfred_nobel/biographical/articles/life-
work.
 2. Steve Blank, “The Secret History of Silicon Valley ,” Computer History Museum. November 20,
2008.
 3. For all subsequent references to Dr . Meg Lowman: Private communications, interviews, and
electronic correspondence with Dr . Meg Lowman, 2014–15.
 4. Alan Mozes, “A  Sense of Purpose May Benefit Your Brain,” WebMD, March 19, 2015, accessed
September 14, 2016, www .webmd.com/healthy-aging/news/20150319/a-sense-of-purpose-may-
benefit-your -brain.
 5. Communication and correspondence with Dr . Adam Grant, 2014.
 6. For all subsequent references to Kevin Starr: Private communications, meetings, of f-sites,
electronic correspondence, more meetings, leadership retreats, heated debates, and cof fee with
Kevin Starr , 2012–present.
 7. Communications and electronic correspondence with Josh Balk, 2015–16.
 8. After meditating for eight weeks, scientists found increased grey matter in the brain regions that
make up the default network. See Britta K. Hölzel, James Carmody , Mark Vangel, Christina
Congleton, Sita M. Yerramsetti, Tim Gard, and Sara W. Lazar , “Mindfulness Practice Leads to
Increases in Regional Brain Gray Matter Density ,” Psychiatry Resear ch (201 1), accessed
September 13, 2016.
 9. Eileen Luders, Florian Kurth, Emeran A. Mayer , Arthur W. Toga, Katherine L. Narr , and
Christian Gaser , “The Unique Brain Anatomy of Meditation Practitioners: Alterations in
Cortical Gyrification,” Frontiers in Human Neur oscience  6 (2012): 34.
 10. P. Goldin, M. Ziv , H. Jazaieri, K. Hahn, and J. J. Gross, “MBSR vs Aerobic Exercise in Social
Anxiety: fMRI of Emotion Regulation of Negative Self-Beliefs,” Social Cognitive and Affective
Neur oscience  8, no. 1 (2013): 65–72.
 11. F. Ferrarelli, “Experienced Mindfulness Meditators Exhibit Higher Parietal-Occipital EEG
Gamma Activity during NREM Sleep,” Plos ONE  8, no. 8 (2013): 1-9,
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0073417.
 Science Appendix
 1. Dardo Tomasi and Nora D. Volkow , “Association Between Functional Connectivity Hubs and
Brain Networks,” Cerebral Cortex  21, no. 9 (201 1): 2003–13.
 2. Steven L. Bressler and Vinod Menon, “Lar ge-scale brain networks in cognition: emer ging
methods and principles.“ Trends in Cognitive Sciences  14, no. 6 (2010): 277– 90.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 270 ---
I n d e x
The page numbers in this index refer to the printed version of this book. The link provided will take
you to the beginning of that print page. You may need to scroll forward from that location to find the
corresponding reference on your e-reader .
Achor , Shawn, 154, 178, 180
actors, 4, 107, 122–23, 161
Ainslie, Geor ge, 181
altruism, 192, 196–204 , 213
Amabile, Teresa, 114
animal suf fering/rights, 200–202
Arab Spring, 4, 66–67
Archimedes, 11, 15, 238
Arkless, David, 91
art/artists, 28, 48, 81, 111, 113, 123–24, 175, 177–78
associative thinking, 84, 139, 204, 217
of crews/teams, 96, 225
essential questions for , 57–62, 68, 210, 219–21
explanation of, 54–57, 68
and pattern recognition, 62–68, 93, 210
thought experiments for , 75–77
athletes, 4, 122, 129, 137, 144, 154–56, 162–64
Autodesk, 57
automotive industry , 54, 77
aviation, 16, 18–19, 60, 77
Babauta, Leo, 72
Bach-y-Rita, Paul, 69
Bahcall, Safi, 154, 156
Balk, Josh, 200–204
Barnum, P . T., 79
Bateman, Matt, 63–64
Beck, Martha, 10, 120–21
behavioral science, 138
Bell Labs, 78
Benson, Herbert, 129

--- PAGE 271 ---
Berman, Adam, 106
biomimicry , 16, 82–85, 92–95, 99, 204, 211
Bíró, László, 9
Black Plague, 64–65
Blue Strawberry Cookbook , The, 160
body language, 119, 128, 228
Bosl, William, 189
Brach, Tara, 114, 184
Brady , Matthew , 164–66
brain-derived neurotropic factor (BDNF), 43
brain modes
focused, 26, 33, 36–37, 39–42, 209–10
meandering, 26, 36–37, 77–78
switching of, 26–32, 37, 91, 98, 209–10
brain, the, 6, 23, 29
creates breakthroughs, 1–5, 10, 25–37
frontal lobes of, 32, 110–11, 140, 205
limitations of, 114, 117
need to refuel, 179
neural connections in, 30, 35, 69–72, 74, 216
neurons of, 30, 35, 43, 69–72, 105, 109
and reality , 149–51, 189
rewiring of, 5, 69–72, 133, 158, 162
synapses of, 43, 109, 236
See also  default network (DN); executive network (EN); fight-or -flight response; hypnagogic
state; hypnopompic state; neuroplasticity; plasticity exercises
BrainPort, 69–70
brainstorming, 57, 86–92, 95–96, 99, 211, 225–26
breakthroughs
crews/teams for , 91–96, 99, 224–26
eureka, 2, 10–13, 15, 19–20, 22–24, 42, 203, 209
explanation of, 1–6, 10, 23, 54, 209
four types of, 10–24, 209
intentional, 10, 106–7, 143
intuitive, 2–3, 11, 15, 18–21, 24, 209
metaphorical, 10, 14–17, 24, 31, 209
origin of, 25–37
paradigm, 11, 21–24, 209
testing them, 95–96, 98–99, 211
unintentional, 10, 106–7, 143
Brown, Brené, 125, 167
Brown, Charlie, 161, 179
Brown, Isaak, 206
Buddhism, 140–41, 207
businesses, 3–4, 6, 13, 65–66, 106, 119, 123, 154, 157, 173
California Academy of Sciences, 193

--- PAGE 272 ---
Cameron, James, 63–64
catastrophizing, 103–4, 143, 211
Catholic Church, 64–65
charisma, 78, 131, 137, 140, 193, 197–98
checklists, 57–58, 61
Cheeseman, Peter , 23
chemists/chemistry , 3, 31, 168–169
Cheyer , Adam, 31–32, 45
Chi, Tom, 95–96, 99, 211, 226
Cialdini, Robert, 116
clothing industry , 16, 40, 55, 80
cognitive
abilities, 34, 110, 129, 179, 189, 239
behavioral therapy , 4, 120, 158
dissonance theory , 116
load, 39, 41, 53, 210, 216
reframing, 146–48, 157, 171, 212
Cohen, Elliot, 55
Columbia University , 182
companies, 3, 16–17, 41–42, 79–80, 174
compassion. See self-for giveness/self-compassion
confabulator , 174
constraints/constraint box, 51–53, 88, 96–99, 211
cooking, 160–61, 170, 212, 222, 232
Coppola, Francis Ford, 52
corporations, 64–65, 91, 156, 203
Craigslist, 92
creative
acts, 113–18, 121, 160, 176, 227
constraints, 51, 53, 210
mode, 37, 45–46, 128–29, 160, 228
process, 3–5, 61
solutions, 12, 42–43
sparks, 53, 73, 210
thinking, 38–39, 57–62, 86–89, 110, 226
walking, 42–45, 50, 217
See also default network (DN)
Curie, Marie, 28, 168–169
Currey , Mason, 43, 53, 177–78
Dahlkoetter , JoAnn, 137, 154–55, 161, 164
Dalai Lama, 141, 230
Dalí, Salvador , 2, 31, 32
dance/dancers, 75, 130, 177, 223, 228
Darwin, 21, 43
de Bono, Edward, 86, 89, 98, 211. See also  Six Thinking Hats
de Mestral, Geor ge, 204

--- PAGE 273 ---
default network (DN), 15, 57, 92, 96, 125, 225
creates breakthroughs, 98, 111
explanation of, 26–32, 35–37, 210, 237–41
and mindless activities, 42
and sleep, 36–37, 215–16
design/designers, 19, 31–32, 36, 51–53, 55–57, 60, 92–93, 177
Dickens, Charles, 43
Direkova, Nadya, 81
Disney , 63, 124
dopamine, 72–73, 84
drawing exercises, 17, 28, 40, 47, 95–98, 217, 227
dreams, 14–16, 24, 26, 29, 31, 209
Duhigg, Charles, 116–17
Duke, Annie, 159, 167–69, 183–84
Dyson, James, 123, 167
Eastgate Centre mall (Zimbabwe), 82
Edison, Thomas, 31, 112, 167
electric pen of, 56, 59
and failure, 156–58
intuitive breakthrough of, 19
and the lightbulb, 96–97, 147–48, 157
and napping, 2, 32
Einstein, Albert, 50, 59, 116, 156
and brain-mode switching, 25–28, 31
intuitive breakthrough of, 1–3
and Olympia Academy , 80–81, 91
paradigm breakthrough of, 21–23
thought experiments of, 75–76, 85, 211
electronic devices, 35, 72–73, 79, 84–85, 88–89, 211
Emm, Pierre, 56
emotional quotient (EQ), 88
emotions, 6, 51, 75, 86–89, 104
accepting them, 184–85
and the brain, 137, 189
detaching from, 149–51, 171, 212, 230
naming them, 229, 231
negative, 146, 205
positive, 198
suppressing them, 146, 154, 184, 230
See also  negativity; positive
England, 14–15, 96, 175, 191
entrepreneurs, 23, 41, 52, 55, 80, 90, 123, 154
environment
auditory , 48–49, 53, 210, 217–18
changing it, 210, 217–19
physical, 45–48, 53, 217–18

--- PAGE 274 ---
psychological, 50–51, 53, 210, 217–19
social, 49, 53, 210, 217
evaluation process, 86–99, 111, 168, 211, 224–25
executive network (EN), 46, 57, 86, 98, 111, 158, 225
explanation of, 26–32, 36–37, 209–11
leaders serve as, 94–96, 99
and mindless activities, 39–41, 43
exercise, 180, 205–6. See also  walking
failure, 10, 125, 187, 190
accepting it, 106–7, 143, 154, 211–12
blueprint for , 170, 231–32
detaching from, 149–51, 166, 171, 212
experience of, 105, 143–45, 170, 212, 232
fear of, 51, 103–8, 143
and grief, 153–55, 171, 184, 212
handling of, 105, 137, 149–53, 169–71, 196–96, 212
learning from, 137, 144, 147–49, 155–56, 160, 167–71, 232
practicing it, 158–66, 170–71, 185, 212, 232
and reframing, 146–48, 155–58, 170, 232
and success, 122–24, 149
See also  impostor syndrome; inner critic; perfectionism; reframing
fear, 86–87, 120, 179
affects the mind, 110–11
of failure, 51, 103–8, 143
four types of, 144–45, 211–12
handling it, 107, 128–43, 196, 211–12, 228, 231
impedes breakthroughs, 10, 17, 103, 137, 143
and social inhibition, 110–18
and your “everybody ,” 120–23, 212
feedback, 86–99, 138, 169–71, 211, 224–26
Ferrazzi, Keith, 78
Ferriss, Tim, 181, 183
fight-or -flight response, 104, 108–11, 118, 128, 146, 170, 176, 232
films/filmmakers, 48, 52–53, 62–65, 122–24, 185, 190, 212, 216, 222
Flaubert, Gustave, 177
fMRI, 146, 189
focus
and executive network (EN), 26, 36, 43, 209–10
vs. lack of focus, 13, 25–30
See also  brain modes: focused
Fogg, B. J., 117, 178–79
Folk, Kenneth, 184
food industry , 200–204
Ford, Henry , 54, 77
forgiveness. See self-for giveness/self-compassion; visualization: for giveness
4-Hour W orkweek , The (Ferriss), 181

--- PAGE 275 ---
France, 28, 55–56, 191–93
Gage, Phineas, 111
Gandhi, Mahatma, 3, 192, 199
Gates, Bill, 204
Genentech, 48, 97
General Mills, 202
genius mode, 81–82, 227
accessing it, 32, 35–53
and breakthroughs, 28–36, 84, 210–11
evaluate output of, 86–99
and sleep, 15, 32–37, 215–16
See also  default network (DN)
Germany , 31, 97, 182
Germer , Christopher , 143, 184
Goldin, Philippe, 110, 119
Goldstein, Daniel, 182
Google, 61, 71, 81, 159
Grant, Adam, 138, 197–99
gratitude, 105, 131–36, 143, 184–85, 195, 212
Greatbatch, Wilson, 204
Gross, Terry, 73
growth mindset, 147–48
Gruenfeld, Deborah, 128
Habicht, Conrad, 80–81
habits/habit formation, 177–83, 187, 190, 207–8, 212, 234
Hampton Creek, 202–4
Hanks, Tom, 122–23
Hanson, Rick, 105, 128
happiness, 41, 72–73, 104–5, 127, 131, 140, 154, 178, 180, 194, 197–98, 205, 213
Harvard Medical School, 34, 190, 235
Harvard University , 86, 112, 114–15, 120, 129, 149, 154, 189
Hawkins, Jef f, 35
Hayes, Steven, 151–52
health, 6, 127, 137
improvement in, 131, 140, 194, 197–98, 213
industry , 55, 79, 90, 182
and meditation, 205, 207, 213
See also  exercise; medicine; pharmaceutical companies
Hearst, William Randolph, 79
Heisenber g, Werner , 44
Hemingway , Ernest, 51
Henry Ford West Bloomfield Hospital, 65–66
Hill, Geor ge, 133
hospital industry , 55, 65–66
hotel industry , 65–66

--- PAGE 276 ---
Howe, Elias, 15–16
hypnagogic state, 32–34, 36–37, 210, 215–16
hypnopompic state, 32, 34–37, 210, 215–16
ideas
files for , 84–85, 211
flow of, 91
gathering of, 5, 77–85, 91, 94, 98, 211
imagination, 61–62, 76–77, 85, 108, 137, 189, 221, 223. See also  plasticity exercises; visualization
implementation phase, 10, 12, 46, 99, 106–7, 111, 143
impostor syndrome, 126
and altruism, 196–97
explanation of, 110–18, 143
and failure, 106, 143, 145, 170, 233
handling it, 112–18, 143, 194, 211–12, 227–28
improv theater , 161, 212
Indiana University , 62
Influence: The Psychology of Persuasion  (Cialdini), 116
inGenius  (Seelig), 149
inner critic, 126, 147
and altruism, 196–97
explanation of, 110–11, 118–24
and failure, 106, 145, 155, 170, 233
and for giveness, 142, 230
handling it, 120–24, 137, 140–43, 151–52, 194, 212, 233
impedes breakthroughs, 119, 136–38, 139
innovators, 3, 23, 25, 28, 30–31, 43, 45, 148, 175, 192. See also  specific fields ; specific people
Institute of Design (D-school), 52–53
Intelligent Change, 134
Internet, 72–73, 84, 127, 156, 182–83
inventors, 43, 45, 50, 123, 149, 177. See also  specific fields ; specific people
Jagger , Mick, 92
Japan’ s bullet train, 82–83
Joan of Arc, 28, 191–93
Jobs, Steve, 3, 28, 51, 54, 112, 193
Johnson, Eric, 182
Jordan, Michael, 118, 122
Kafka, Franz, 186
Kant, Immanuel, 44, 177
Kekulé, Friedrich August, 31
Kierkegaard, Søren, 43–44
Komisar , Randy , 149
Kübler -Ross model, 153
labyrinths, 39, 41–42, 216

--- PAGE 277 ---
Laennec, René, 55
Langer , Ellen, 115
Lasseter , John, 124
leaders, 16–17, 20–21, 94–95, 99, 157–58, 161, 193, 247
learning, 6, 144, 147–49, 154, 170–71, 205, 211–12, 232
Lieff, Jon, 198, 204, 235–36
literature, 81. See also  writers
Lowman, Meg, 193–94
LUMIAMI, 58–62
Maisel, Eric, 161
marketing, 47, 65, 79
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), 34, 42, 55, 81, 90–91, 112, 189
mathematicians, 21, 28, 81, 178
maximizing, 110, 126–27, 143, 170, 178, 212, 232
McGonigal, Kelly , 72–73, 181
medicine, 97, 129. See also  pharmaceutical companies; technology: medical
meditation, 4, 180–81, 204–8, 213, 228, 232
Metta exercise, 140–43, 228–29
Microsoft, 51, 78, 114
mind-body connection, 115, 118, 137, 212, 217, 227
mind wandering, 13, 25, 38–47, 53, 77–78, 98, 194, 210, 216
Mindful Path to Self-Compassion , The (Germer), 142–143
mindfulness, 4, 204–5, 232–33. See also  meditation
mindless activities, 38–45, 53, 216–19
mission/purpose, 41, 66–67, 164–65, 191–95, 197, 200–204 , 213, 232
Moral Molecule , The (Zak), 130
Mother Teresa, 199, 230
Mozart, Wolfgang Amadeus, 50
Mulago Foundation, 200
Museum of Modern Art (New York City), 42
music/musicians, 39, 43, 48, 50, 60, 73–75, 81, 92, 113, 162, 223
Musk, Elon, 148
Napwell, 34
NASA, 22–23
NASCAR, 11–12
nature, 16, 34–35, 44, 46, 82, 85, 91–92, 104, 211, 216
Neff, Kristin, 139–41
negativity , 109–10, 189, 205
bias, 103–5, 120, 143, 149–51, 211
and gratitude, 131, 134–35
handling it, 120, 152, 171, 231–32
ill effects of, 118–20
and self-compassion, 138–40
See also  catastrophizing; emotions: negative; inner critic
networking, 78–85, 211

--- PAGE 278 ---
neurofeedback, 162–63
neuroplasticity , 5, 69–77, 104, 131, 160, 162, 211, 235–37
neuroscience, 2, 4, 29, 110
neuroscientists, 26, 30, 140, 155, 160, 174, 185, 205, 232
Never Eat Alone  (Ferrazzi), 78
Nobel, Alfred, 192
Nobel Prize, 23, 78, 168, 192
noises/sound, 48–49. See also  music/musicians
O’Connor , Bill, 57, 61
open-mindedness, 79, 95, 125, 217, 226
O’Reilly , Samuel, 56, 59
Ouderkirk, Andy , 156
Oxford Very Short Introduction series, 82
oxytocin, 130–31, 185, 197, 199, 228
Paine, Thomas, 79
parasympathetic nervous system (PNS), 128–30, 207
Parker , T. J., 55–56
Pasinski, Marie, 160, 185
Pell, Barney , 23
Pentland, Alex “Sandy”, 90–91
perfectionism, 106, 110, 124–26, 143, 170, 212, 233
pharmaceutical companies, 31, 48, 55–56, 154
Phelps, Michael, 163
philanthropy , 199–200
philosophers, 21, 28, 43–44, 79–81, 175, 177
physics/physicists, 1, 18, 22–23, 81–82, 154, 168
PillPack, 55–56
Pittard, Dana, 20–21
Pixar Animation Studios, 124
plasticity exercises, 73–77, 84–85, 222–24
Plunkett, Roy , 204–5
poker , 159, 167–70, 176, 183–84, 190, 212, 232
positive
experiences, 135
habits, 190
things, 105, 132, 134, 150–51, 228–29
thinking, 87, 104, 167
See also  emotions: positive; gratitude
practice
experiential, 158–62, 170–71
mental, 158, 162–66, 170–71
problems, 38–39
defining them, 36, 44
letting go of, 12–13, 23, 25–26, 33
psychology , 4, 86, 114, 116, 137, 144, 183

--- PAGE 279 ---
Radical Acceptance  (Brach), 114
radio, 115, 156
Raichle, Marcus, 30–31
Ramos, Andreas, 92
redundancy , 78–79
reframing, 170, 232
cognitive, 146–48, 157, 171, 212
social proof, 147, 153, 155–58, 171, 212
relaxation, 129–31, 143, 212
Relaxation Response (RR), 129–30, 228
resilience, 90, 117, 138, 145, 159, 194
Richards, Keith, 25–29, 60, 92
risk-taking, 80, 87–88, 106, 112–14, 192–94, 198, 228
Rock, David, 110
Rolling Stones, 25–29, 60, 92
Rotkof f, Steve, 66
routines, 177–85, 190, 207, 212, 225
Salk, Jonas, 192
Sanders, Tammy , 19
Sauer , Kevin, 51, 78, 114
Schwartz, Barry , 127
Schwartz, Tony, 179–80
science, 1–3, 23, 39, 44, 106, 130–31, 193
Science magazine, 182
science fiction, 61, 79
scientists, 22–23, 79, 90–91, 97, 116, 152, 156, 175, 178
Seelig, Tina, 52–53, 148–49, 167
SEIQ (seven essential innovation questions), 57–62, 68, 210, 219–21
self-confidence, 117, 136–39, 151, 179, 194, 198, 227
self-criticism. See inner critic
self-doubt, 42, 118–20, 147, 156–57, 213
self-for giveness/self-compassion, 136–43, 145, 170, 197, 212, 230, 232
self-image, 112–18, 143, 211, 227
Silicon Valley , 4, 16–17, 80, 92, 95, 149, 193
Sime, Wes, 144, 162–63
Sims, Tom, 57
Siri, 31–32
Six Thinking Hats, 86–92, 98, 211, 224–25
Six Thinking Hats  (de Bono), 98
sleep, 1–2, 31–37, 205, 210, 215–16
small wins/breakthroughs, 22–23, 87, 114, 116–18, 179–80, 190, 227
social inhibition, 26, 110–18, 124, 126
solitude, 49–50, 85, 90–91
Solovine, Maurice, 80
SpaceX, 148
Spadaro-Grant, Victoria, 13

--- PAGE 280 ---
sports, 56–57, 61, 118, 159, 161, 170, 186–87, 190, 212, 232. See also  athletes
Stanford, 4, 43, 52, 80–81, 110, 112, 117, 128, 146, 178
Starr , Kevin, 200
start-ups, 36, 88–90, 123, 202–4
StartX, 4, 80–81, 88–90
Sternber g, Esther , 109
stress, 108–10, 128, 131, 140, 146, 194, 198, 205, 207
success, 116–18. See also  small wins/breakthroughs
SuperT ools, 6, 191–208 , 213
supplies
notebooks, 33, 45, 84, 85, 134, 211, 215, 217
recording devices, 34–35, 79–85, 211, 215–16
sketch pads, 17, 28
sympathetic nervous system (SNS), 112, 118, 128, 130, 176
Tan, Chade-Meng, 207–8, 232
tattooing machine, 56, 59
technology
advances in, 12, 70, 77–80, 136, 173
companies, 45, 51, 57, 79–81, 88–90, 123–24
inventions of, 31–32, 34–35, 56–57, 79, 193
medical, 3–4, 16, 55, 90
See also  electronic devices
Teflon, 204–5
Teller, Astro, 71, 148, 168
Tesla, Nikola, 13, 31, 50
Tetrick, Josh, 202–4
Tharp, Twyla, 177
theory of relativity , 1–2, 22, 25, 27, 30, 80
threat response. See fight-or -flight response
Tiny Habits method, 178–79
travel, 49
trial-and-error , 167
uncertainty , 78, 166
and daily routines, 177–85, 190, 212
dealing with it, 173–78, 194–97
discomfort with, 174–76, 184–87, 189–90
practicing it, 176, 184–87, 190, 212
reducing it, 175–77, 183–84, 190, 212
and responsibility transfer , 187–90, 212, 231
Unilever , 203–4
Upton, Francis Robbins, 97
U.S. government, 193
U.S. military , 4, 11–12, 18–21, 66–67, 158, 162, 164–66
Uslan, Michael, 62–63, 112

--- PAGE 281 ---
van Grinsven, Gerard, 66
Velcro, 3, 16, 105, 204
visual thinking, 17, 33, 69–70, 95–98, 226–27
visualization, 5, 48, 230
and failure, 170–71, 181, 231
forgiveness, 142–43, 232
and high performers, 162–66
and purpose finding, 194–95
and Relaxation Response, 129–30
and responsibility transfer , 188–89, 231
von Helmholtz, Hermann, 97
walking, 39, 42–45, 47, 50, 53, 70, 177–78, 205, 210, 217
Walter Reed Army Medical Center , 55
Watt, James, 12
Watts, William, 14–15, 31
Weihenmayer , Erik, 69–70
Weiss, Alan, 173
willpower , 181–83, 190, 205
Willpower Instinct , The (McGonigal), 72–73, 181
Wiseman, Richard, 155, 232
Wright Brothers, 16, 60, 77
writers, 43–44, 51, 81, 86, 91, 111, 135, 176–78
writing exercises, 45, 95, 98, 118, 126, 131, 134, 155, 170, 216–17, 226–27, 230–32
Yeager , Chuck, 18–19
Your Performing Edge  (Dahlkoetter), 137
Zak, Paul, 130–31, 229
Zen Habits  blog (Babauta), 72
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 282 ---
* The salience network is a network of regions that, among other things, focuses our attention on the
most salient information at any time. This network has been found to actually direct our attention
either to people, facts, or events outside of us, or to things happening inside of us. It mediates
between our EN and our DN. It consists of the the anterior insula and dorsal anterior cingulate cortex,
the amygdala, the ventral striatum, and the substantia nigra/ventral tegmental area. Things that pique
the salience network include anything out of the ordinary , anything that breaks a pattern, anything
surprising, pleasurable, or rewarding, anything relevant to the self or which engages the emotions.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 283 ---
* Some people feel that naps leave them in a zombielike state for the rest of the day . If that’ s the case
with you, just use these tools in the evening at bedtime.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 284 ---
* This might explain why so many project managers make bad decisions when something they are
responsible for is of f-track.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 285 ---
* Aside from being the youngest tenured and five-time highest-rated professor at the Wharton
School, Grant is the author of two New Y ork T imes best-selling books that we highly recommend (see
the resources section), and is legendary for his generosity in time, guidance, and active help.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 286 ---
* Our dear friend Safi Bahcall knows whereof he speaks: son of a prominent physicist father and
astrophysicist mother , he received his BA  in physics from Harvard, his physics PhD from Stanford,
and as if that weren’ t enough, after a stint at consulting giant McKinsey he cofounded two successive
pharmaceutical companies, receiving accolades and awards along the way . The fact that he’ s also one
of the nicest people you’ll ever meet is borderline ridiculous.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 287 ---
* We hope.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 288 ---
* We are using both terms because although people tend to use them interchangeably , they are
different. A routine is done without thinking; a ritual is done with intention.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 289 ---
* The option got named the EBAD (the couple’ s initials) and is now a running family joke.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 290 ---
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 291 ---
What’s next on
your reading list?
Discover your next
great read!
Get personalized book picks and up-to-date news about this author .
Sign up now .
OceanofPDF .com