

--- PAGE 1 ---


--- PAGE 2 ---
Advance Praise for
Reinventing You
“As the corporate ladder morphs into a corporate lattice,
wher e there is no single climb towar d career success but
rather a multiplicity of ways to grow, personal branding
becomes your calling card. Reinventing You presents
eﬀective ways to help you develop your brand pr oposition.”
—Cathy Benk o, Vice Chair man, Deloitte LLP; best-selling
author, The Corporate Lattice: A chieving High P erformance
in the Changing W orld of W ork
“The days of reliable, lifelong careers—compl ete with
pension and gold watch—ar e over. With Dorie Clark’s clear,
practical, step-by-step approach to reinvention, the reader
comes to see this fact not as daunting, but rife with
opportunity and possibilit y. Enriched with riveting examples
from the worlds of business, politics, and nonpr oﬁts, this
indispensable guide will help you take contr ol of and shape
your pr ofessional life.”
—Meg Cadoux Hirshber g, author, For Better or F or Work: A
Survival Guide for Entr epreneurs and Their F amilies
“Necessity may still be the mother of invention, but today’s
relentlessly changing world necessitates reinvention,
sometimes sequential reinvention. I can think of no better
guide through that daunting process than Dorie Clark’s
wonderfully r eadable and infor mative book.”

--- PAGE 3 ---
—Robert Cialdini, author, Inﬂuence: The P sychology of
Persuasion
Reinventing You is a must-r ead for anyone who wants to
expand their career horizons and become more authentic—
in work and in life.”
—Chip Conley, author, Emotional Equations: Simple T ruths
for Cr eating Happiness + Success;  founder, Joie de V ivre
Hospitality, Inc.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 4 ---
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 5 ---
C o p y r i g h t
Copyright 2013 Dorie Clark
All rights r eserved
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in or
introduced into a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any
form, or by any means (electr onic, mechanical,
photocopying, recording,  or otherwise), without the prior
permission of the publisher . Requests for permissio n should
be directed to permissions@hbsp.harvar d.edu , or mailed to
Permissions, Harvar d Business School Publishing, 60
Harvar d Way, Boston, Massachusetts 02163.
First eBook Edition: April 2013
ISBN: 978-1-4221-4413-8
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 6 ---
For my mother, Gail Clark, with love
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 7 ---
Contents
Copyright
1. The New Branding Landscape
2. Recognize Where Y ou’re Starting
3. Research Y our Destination
4. Test-Drive Y our P ath
5. Develop the Skills Y ou Need
6. Who’s Y our Mentor?
7. Leverage Y our Points of Diﬀerence
8. Build Y our Narrative
9. Reintroduce Y ourself
10. Prove Y our W orth
11. K eep It Going
Epilogue: Mak e Your Reinvention W ork
Appendix A : 
   Your P rofessional R einvention Self -Assessment
Appendix B:  
   Classr oom or Book Gr oup Discussion Questions
Notes
About the Author
Acknowledgments

--- PAGE 8 ---
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 9 ---
CHAPTER 1
The New Branding Landscape
Are you wher e you want to be professionally? Whether you
want to advance faster at your company or change jobs or
even careers, one thing is clear : no one wants to spend a
lifetime doing a job they hate. To succeed in today’s
competitive job mark et and build a career that leverages
your unique passions and talent, it’s almost certain that at
some point you’ll need to reinvent yourself professionally—
and ensur e that others recognize the powerful contribution
you can mak e.
After all, it’s clear that the era of gold watches and
lifetime employment is over. How many people do you know
who are lifers at a comp any? For better or worse, people
today skip around professionally, forced by layoﬀs or
seeking a better title or salary . Even for those who would
have wanted to make a career at one company, the options
are limited. Harvar d Business School Professor Thomas
DeLong attributes this, in part, to a precipitous decline in
professional mentorship over the past several decades. As
senior executives were forced to take on increased
responsibilities, they stopped making time to cultiv ate rising
talent. The result, says DeLong, is executives who “start to
be suspicious about the organization and see themselves as
free agents rather than saying, ‘I can stay at this ﬁr m for the
next thirty years.’” Rapid job turnover has now become
standar d.

--- PAGE 10 ---
Even if they stay with the same company or industry,
professionals still need to reinvent themselves to keep up
with the rapid pace of corporate change. “How are you
adapting and approaching your next reinvention curve?”
asks Steven Rice, the executive vice president of human
resour ces at Silicon Valley power house Juniper Networks, of
job applican ts. “How are you staying relevant and
competitive? People have to reinvent themselves to ﬁt into
the new conte xt of work.”
Amid this new landscape of frequent job and career
changing, people are increasingly working later in life.
Sometimes that’s due to preference, and sometimes to
necessity . (Between the recession years of 2007 and 2010,
the number of working Americans ﬁfty-ﬁve and over grew
by nearly 8 percent—th e only group whose workfor ce
participation rates increased.)1 As AARP’s policy director
told the National Journal, “the resour ces they were counting
on to retire just aren’t there.”2 That means even more
opportunities, or requir ements, to reinvent yourself  over the
course of your car eer.
The lengthening careers of baby boomers also have an
impact on their kids, mille nnials struggling to ﬁnd their way
in the workfor ce and hitting a wall of more experienced
candidates eager for the same jobs. In 2011, the percentage
of employed young peopl e hit a sixty-year low.3 If your early
jobs don’t reﬂect your desir ed futur e path, it’s essential to
be strategic about how you’r e positioning yourself and your
experience in or der to maneuver to wher e you want to be.
As Henry Wadsworth Longfellow noted, “we judge
ourselves by what we feel capable of doing, while others
judge us by what we have already done.” So when  you’r e a
ﬁnance guy who moves into mark eting, a ventur e capitalist
who wants to become a career coach, or an executive trying
to win a promotion to the next level, your path may make

--- PAGE 11 ---
perfect sense to you, but that doesn’t mean it’s clear to
everyone else.
Reinvention, and overcoming past perceptions, can be a
daunting process. Not everyone needs to rebran d himself
professionally, of course. If you do have a long-ter m career
at your company and are happy with your trajectory, you
may not need to worry about it. But for many of us, that
luxury doesn’t e xist.
This book is intended to help executives at all stages of
their careers who want something diﬀer ent and better in
their professional lives—and know there has to be a more
strategic way to do it. You may be struggling to ﬁnd a
toehold in an inhospitable economic climate, like Johnna, a
young professional I’ll proﬁle later who was forced to bide
her time with retail jobs instead of hopping on the career
fast track. You may be facing a crisis in your industry that’s
forcing you to consider new options, like Tom, who was laid
oﬀ after more than two decades as a newspaper reporter .
You may, like Dan, have to ﬁght back against
misconceptions about you in order to succeed at your
company . You may be looking to build new skills and explor e
new interests, like Karen, a corporate attor ney who realized
she desperat ely needed a change. This book is an invitation
to ask what you want out of life.
When Should Y ou Reinvent Y ourself
Professionally?
 
You’re at a new phase in life and you want to be known
for something diﬀer ent.
You’ve been laid oﬀ and need to ensur e you’r e in the
best position possible to land a new job quickly .

--- PAGE 12 ---
You want to move up in your company, and you need to
take contr ol of your r eputation.
You’ve been trying to win a promotion, but feel you’re
being held back by misconceptions about what you’r e
capable of .
You’d lik e to move into a diﬀer ent ar ea of your company,
perhaps from legal to human resour ces, or from sales to
ﬁnance.
You’re just starting out in your career and haven’t built
up a powerfu l résumé yet, so you need to ﬁnd another
way to stand out.
You’re changing careers and need to make a compelling
case that your unusual backgr ound is an asset, not a
liability .
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 13 ---
The Perils of Reinventing Your
Personal Brand
“Hi Dorie,” r ead the message in my inbo x, from an e xecutive
I’d been hoping to interview for this book. “I’d be happy to
talk with you, but I’d prefer to remain anonymous. I’m afraid
it migh t hurt my personal brand to be seen talking about my
personal brand!” His message was only half-joking (I did
eventually interview him), but it highlights an important
truth. Again and again, as I’ve talked about the book in
business school classr ooms and corporate boardrooms
across the country, I’ve heard from profession als who
recognize the need to reinvent themselves, but still have
qualms. Won’t it look calculating to think too hard about my
reputation? Shouldn’t I just focus on doing good work?
The idea that it’s somehow sleazy to manage your
reputation is, of course, what the anonymous executive who
e-mailed me was getting at. We can all think of examples. I
know one executive who is legendary for her ability, within
minutes of meeting any new person, to inform him or her
that she’s the graduate of two Ivy League schools, drives a
BMW, and makes six ﬁgures working at a prominent ﬁrm.
Sometimes, if several months have elapsed and she’s
forgotten she’s already met you, you’ll get to hear her spiel
again. No one lik es her .
I am in no way suggesting you should start spouting your
credentials to passersby or puﬃng up your résumé. This
book isn’t about spin or presenting yourself as something
you’r e not. It’s not about  “foghor ning” your way into other
people’s consciousness and telling them how great you are.
Instead, it’s about takin g contr ol of your life and living
strategically . Who do you want to be? And what do you need

--- PAGE 14 ---
to do to get there? This is a book about deﬁning your goals,
working hard and ethically to get there, and then making
sure that people notice once you do .
I come from the world of media relations and marketing,
so I’ll admit, I’m biased.  But I’ve also seen ﬁrsth and that
there are always plenty of talented, qualiﬁed people out
there. If you aren’t strateg ic about getting the word out in a
thoughtful way that adds value, then other people will win
the accolades instead of you.
That’s why, unfortunately, it’s no longer possible to sit
back and count on getting  noticed for your hard work alone.
Years ago, the successful Wall Street investor (and former
US Treasury Secretary) William Simon declar ed, “I have
never been  interested  in merchandising myself or
perpetuating a public image. Indeed, it is always diﬃcult to
ascertain just what your image is and it is almost impossible
to improve or diminish how people view you other than
through direct personal contact. I simply work hard and try
to be successful at what I do .”4 Simon perfectly captur es the
classic upper -crust ethos that it’s tacky to take an interest in
anything so shallow as a mere image. And certainly, he’s
right that what matters are your actions and your character,
rather than the spin you put on it.
But his response, which may have been perfectly
appropriate for a child of the Depr ession who died in 2000,
just as the internet era was rising, no longer makes sense
for any professional who aspires to excellence. The idea that
you can just keep your head down and work without any
regard to oﬃce politics, for instance, has been thoroughly
discredited (just look at the profusion of networking books,
workshops, and seminars). Even the oﬃce wallﬂower knows
he should hit the company holiday party or risk missing out
on the connections he needs to advance. So why should it
be any diﬀer ent for taking contr ol of your personal brand?

--- PAGE 15 ---
Sure, you can take a chance that perhaps you’ll be
noticed, and perhaps all those hours slaving at your desk
will pay oﬀ. But why risk it? Why not take the time to think
about how you’d like to be seen in the world and then work
strategically to accomplish that, rather than waiting for life
to happen to you?
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 16 ---
My Own Reinvention
I became fascinated with the topic of reinvention because
I’ve done quite a bit of it myself . These days, I consult on
strategy and mark eting for clients like Google, Yale
University, and the National Park Service. But my ﬁrst brush
with professional reinvention came shortly after graduate
school, when  I was workin g as a rookie political reporter at a
weekly newspaper . It was a Monday afternoon; someone
told me I should stop by the HR oﬃce befor e heading home
that night. I ﬁgured there was an adjustment to our health
insurance policy or I needed to ﬁll out some forms. Instead,
after less than a year on the job, I was laid oﬀ. As my
colleagues were streaming out for the night, I had to pack
up my desk and close out my online accounts; there was no
chance to say goodbye.
The next morning, glancing at CNN over breakfast, I
watched the planes hit the World Trade Center . I lost my
reporting job on September 10, 2001, and—as the
geopolitical order spun out of contr ol and the economy
collapsed—I had to ﬁgure out how to make a living, and
what was ne xt.
Over time, despite the fear and paralysis in the
mark etplace, I built up a stream of business as a freelance
journalist. But the money wasn’t great, and I was still hoping
that I’d event ually be hired by the daily paper in my city. But
it was under a hiring freeze, subject to the same internet-
driven contraction as everyone else in the industry . For
months, I plowed on, still imagining a futur e in journalism.
So when I received an oﬀer to “switch sides” and become
the press secretary for Robert Reich, the former US Labor
Secretary who was then a guber natorial candidate, I initially
said no. But an hour later, I called back; that’s perhaps
wher e my r einvention pr ocess began.

--- PAGE 17 ---
If the world hadn’t intervened, I might still be a reporter; I
love writing, meeting new people, and breathing the oxygen
of interesting ideas. But the world is moving faster than
ever, industries change, companies collap se, and
sometimes our plans simply don’t work out. I also would
have loved to run the White House press oﬃce, but that
dream died around the time the presidential candidate I
later work ed for lost in the primaries. To survive and thrive,
you have to r einvent yourself and move on.
And sometim es, of course, your reinvention is by choice: a
creative embrace of a new direction. For a couple of years, I
ran a nonpr oﬁt advocacy group and could have done so for
several more. Instead, I decided to become an entrepreneur
and launch my consulting business, a move that’s allowed
me to travel the globe, consult for leading companies, and
earn a gr eat and fulﬁlling living.
It’s easy for me to see the connections and commo nalities
in retrospect: how my time as a journalist enabled me to be
a better spinmeister when I started working for candidates,
or how running a nonpr oﬁt gave me the broad-based
business skills, from IT to ﬁnance, that I needed to become
a consultant. But I also know those transitions might seem
random to other people (and that’s not even mentioning my
time as a documentary  ﬁlmmak er or Harvar d theology
student). For years after I started my consulting business,
people would still ask about campaigns I was working on, or
how my advocacy work was going. Hadn’t they gotten the e-
newsletters announcing my new ventur e? Or visited my new
website? Were they just not paying attention?
But, of course, lik e most people, they wer en’t. The truth is,
the vast majority of peop le aren’t focused on you (or me)
very much. That means their perceptions are probably a few
years out of date, and it’s not their fault. With hundreds, or
even thousa nds, of Facebook friends and vague social
connections, we can’t expect everyone to remember all the

--- PAGE 18 ---
details of our lives. That’s why it’s so essential that we take
charge of our own reinvention and ensur e our personal
brands r eﬂect, to the outside world, the r eality of our lives.
As a consu ltant who specializes in mark eting and
branding, once I launched my business, it was essential for
me—very quickly—to practice what I preached. I had to
make sure my contacts understood exactly what skills I had
and what services I oﬀered, and to demonstrate suﬃcient
expertise that, when the right moment came, I’d be the
consultant they tur ned to . So I honed my nar rative (what am
I bringing to the table?), crafted my content (so clients could
get a taste of my ideas and approach), and began using
every vehicle  possible—fr om speaking to writing to enlisting
“validators”—to spr ead the message.
That’s the same process any professional goes through
when reinventing herself . As I’ve built my consulting
business, crafting mark eting strategies for corporations,
executives who learned about my backgr ound would often
approach me. Could I help with their reinvention? Wher e
should they start? What  if they weren’t sure about their
destination? And how could they begin to overtur n the
entrenched perceptions others held about them? Over the
years, I’ve had the pleasur e of advising scores of executives
looking for new directions . This book is the produc t of those
conversations. I hope it proves useful as you consider your
next professional iteration.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 19 ---
The Art of Reinventing Yourself
Over the course of the next ten chapters—thr ough case
studies, exercises, and resear ch-based best practices—I’ll
guide you thr ough the pr ocess.
In chapter 2—just as every business project or military
operation has to begin with the facts on the ground—you
have to discover how you’r e currently perceived. What do
people make of you? What do they really respect? And
what’s holding you back? I’ll walk through strategies and
exercises to help you gain insight from your friends and
cowork ers so you can gather actionable intelligence without
sounding nosy, entitled, or Gestapo -esque.
After that, in chapter 3, I’ll turn to resear ching your
destination. You may know you want a change in your
professional life, but are unsur e what that looks like. I’ll lay
out strategies to investigate your potential passions in the
early stage s, from behind-the-scenes resear ch to
informational interviews, and the right way to enlist others’
help as you focus in on a new futur e.
In chapter 4, I’ll talk about ways to test-drive your path to
deter mine the perfect ﬁt. You’ll read about professionals
who have strategically deployed volunteer ing, job
shadowing, board membership, and more to plot their next
move—and learn tips for identif ying the best opportunities
and ways to maximize your e xperience.
Chapter 5 covers how to develop and reﬁne the skills
you’ll need as you reinvent yourself . How can you leverage
your existing job to prepare for the one you want? Should
you go back to graduate school, or is it a waste of money?
We’ll look at how to ascertain the most strategic, cost-
eﬃcient ways to get the knowledge you need.

--- PAGE 20 ---
Chapter 6 focuses on that elusive creatur e, the mentor :
something everyone wants, but so few people are able to
ﬁnd. I’ll talk about how to identif y good candidates, spot
unlikely gems, persuade them to help you, and get the most
out of your r elationship.
In chapter 7, I cover how to leverage your points of
diﬀer ence. Too often, outsiders will dismiss your previous
experience as irrelevant. We’ll show them how your diverse
knowledge and skills bring something new to the table, and
make you far more eﬀective than anyone else in the room.
I’ll look at examples of how people can diﬀer entiate their
brands and become well-known for being their best selves.
In chapter 8, I focus on creating your narrative. People
want to understand who you are, so we have to craft an
explanatory story that makes sense and shows continuity
from your past to the present. Most importantly, we have to
explain why your transiti on adds value to others and is an
authentic e xtension of your true natur e.
Now it’s time for the big unveiling. In chapter 9 , I’ll discuss
the nuts-and-bolts of reintroducing the new you. When’s the
right moment to introduce your new brand? Are there
strategic opportunities you can leverage? How can you win
over past friends and colleagues who know you in a
diﬀer ent conte xt and may question your new career
identity? I’ll also talk about how you can harness little-
known strategies like teaming up with validators and
identif ying the hot spots in your company or industry wher e
you’r e likely to get the most pr ofessional traction.
In chapter 10 , I’ll walk you through concr ete ways you can
demonstrate your expertise, impress the major players, and
prove your worth. Every art student has a portfolio ready to
be shown at a moment’s notice. It’s no diﬀer ent in the
business world; no one will believe you’r e serious unless you
begin to create content that demonstrates your expertise.

--- PAGE 21 ---
That allows potential customers or employers to test-drive
your approach befor e they make a large commitment. (If
you’r e a graphic designer, having contacts check out an
image gallery of corporate logos you’ve created may inspir e
them to send you that major new account.) I’ll go over
strategies such as how to leverage your online brand,
aﬃliate with brand-name organizations in your ﬁeld, get
published in major journals, build credibility through
assuming leadership positions, and mor e.
By chapter 11 , you’v e deve loped a new, robust brand, and
you need to stay on top of how it’s perceived in the
mark etplace. I’ll identif y online channels to monitor
regularly and talk about setting up your own ongoing
feedback mechanisms to keep you honest. I’ll talk about
ways to mingle your old and new brands success fully, and
the importance of staying  consistent and committe d moving
forwar d. (A desir e to expand into international work won’t
go far if you don’t make the eﬀort to learn new languages or
the nuances of other cultur es. And a onetime charitable gift
is nice, but quickly forgotten.) The key is long-ter m eﬀort,
and I’ll show you prominent examples of professionals
who’ve succeeded and e xplain why .
Finally, in the epilogue, I’ll bring it all togeth er and
summarize your road map to reinvention. As a hardworking
professional, you want to understand, and shape, how
you’r e perceived by others. By following the steps we
outline in the following chapters, you’r e on your way to
cultivating a powerful brand that reﬂects who you are—and
want to be.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 22 ---
CHAPTER 2
Recognize Where You’re Starting
The ﬁrst step in reinventing yourself professionally is getting
a handle on wher e you’r e starting. Everyone has a personal
brand, whet her some skeptics want to admit it or not:
there’s no such thing as opting out. The concept of personal
branding gained currency in the late 1990s, after a famous
Tom Peters cover story ran in Fast Company  (“The Brand
Called You”). But really what we’re talking about is
something that’s always existed: your reputation.  What do
people think of you? What do they say when you leave the
room? Understanding that, and identif ying any gaps
between the current reality and wher e you want to be in the
futur e, is critical to beginning your reinvention process.
(Even if you’r e not sure where you want to end up, starting
with a “personal brand inventory” is useful becau se it can
shed light on your unique strengths and areas wher e your
colleagues think you could mak e a contribution.)
You may think you already know how others view you—as
a skilled communicator, or an incisive numbers guy, or a
manager who always brings out the best in her team. But
then again, you might be surprised. One executive coach
told me about a client who was shock ed to hear that his
colleagues consider ed him ar rogant. Despite being a modest
and fairly self-depr ecating guy, his habit of interrupting
people convinced them he felt superior—almost the exact
opposite of the truth. This behavior, which had been

--- PAGE 23 ---
hampering his career, was easy to correct once he
recognized it.
The message you’r e giving others may be very diﬀer ent
than what you intend. So follow the advice of angel investor
Judy Robinett: “If three people tell you you’r e a horse, buy a
saddle.” In other words, listen to what those in the outside
world are telling you, because they’r e probably right. So
how do you get that feedback? There are four major ways
you can get a read on how others perceive your personal
brand. In this chapter, I’ll teach you to become your own HR
executive—or private detective—and lear n how to:
 
Conduct your own “360 interviews.”
Hold your own focus gr oup with friends and colleagues.
Examine your online pr esence.
Seek out patter ns in past perfor mance evaluations or
recommendation letters.
Finally, we’ll integrate the data to get the full pictur e
about your brand.
Getting Started
At the back of this book, in appendix A, you’ll ﬁnd “Your
Professional Reinvention Self-Assessment” worksheet,
which may be helpful to ﬁll out as you r einvent yourself .
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 24 ---
Your Personal 360 Interview
The ﬁrst step when you’r e working with almost any
corporate coach is to do a “360” (as in, all directions).
Basically, that means the coach will interview everyone in
your spher e—your boss, peers, subor dinates, clients,
suppliers—and try to elicit honest feedback about you and
your performance. (It’s necessary to talk to everyone  to
locate the suck-ups who are perfect in their relationships
with their bosses and tyrants to everyone below .) It’s
obviously easier for people to speak openly to third parties
who promise anonymity (coaches usually aggregate the
data and won’t reveal who said what). If you work for a
company with a reasonable training or professional
development budget, ask if it would be willing to hire an
executive coach to work with you. Becaus e many
employees shy away from coaches, viewing them as
“remedial education for executives,” your boss is likely to be
impressed with your proactive approach to self-
improvement.
Even if your company won’t pay for a coach, it may have
recommendations about coaches you can retain personally .
They can be e xpensive, with fees in the thousands or tens of
thousands of dollars, but if you’r e in a position to do it, the
information they gather (and their recommendations based
on it) can be invaluable.  You can also ask for suggestions
from colleagues.
But what if you simply aren’t able to work with an outside
coach? Don’t worry: there are steps you can take to elicit
“360” information yourself . First, create a list of questions
you think would be helpful in enhancing your self-
knowledge. Executive coach Michael Melcher suggests
“pair ed questions” such as, “What’s my strength? What’s

--- PAGE 25 ---
not my strength? What career can you see me in? What
career can you deﬁnitely not see me in?” That format, says
Melcher, “gives people permission to give the full pictur e—
they don’t want to be too negative.” The best questions will
be the ones most relevan t to you. But just for starters, some
additional e xamples might be:
 
What ar e three wor ds you’d use to describe me?
If you didn’t already know what I do for a living, what
would you guess?
I’m trying to go from X to Y; what steps would you
suggest for me?
Who are some people who have some of the qualities I
should be trying to build?
What ar e my blind spots?
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 26 ---
Tapping Y our Network
Next, identif y the people you’ll be reaching out to. Wher eas
a coach who has been hired to interview people about you
has license to talk to people in your organization, you need
to be more careful if you’r e doing your own assessment
(plus, you don’t want to tip your hand if you’r e considering a
move away from your current employer). Focus on friends,
colleagues, and family members who know you well and
whom you can trust to give you honest feedback (no
frenemies need apply). Phyllis Stein, the former director of
Radcliﬀe College Career Services at Harvar d University,
suggests identif ying up to twenty people who exemplif y the
interests, skills, and values you admir e—pr eferably a
geographically diverse assortment of men and women in
diﬀer ent ﬁelds—to get the br oadest perspective possible.
Now, it’s time to make the approach. Melcher suggests
making it clear that you want to set aside time for an
interview, not just regular  friendly chitchat. “If you tell your
friend you’r e interviewing them, they take it much more
seriously and will give you diﬀer ent answers,” he says. “You
have to signal to people why you’r e having the
conversation: ‘I’m going to spend the next twenty minutes
asking you about my brand, because I’d really like to see
how I’m per ceived.’”
Face-to -face interviews often yield better answers
because you can follow up in real time if something isn’t
clear or if you’d like to probe an answer further,  but they
don’t always work. Sometimes, geography intervenes—
you’r e in Miami and the interviewee is in Mumbai.
Sometimes, your respondent is just too busy, and the best
you’r e going to get is an e-mail pecked out on a smartphone
in between layovers. And sometimes—let’s be honest—you

--- PAGE 27 ---
can’t handle  the feedback. It’s easy enough to tamp your
down emotio ns if you’r e reading an e-mail; you can just
snap the screen shut, take a long walk, and calm down if
you see something you weren’t expecting. But in real time,
it can be harder to hide your emotions. Sometimes  the truth
can be painfu l, and if your poker face isn’t up to snuﬀ, you
may want to stick to electr onic communication.
The secret, whether you’r e meeting in person or sending
an e-mail request, is to stress the need for honesty
(otherwise, what’s the point?). New York–based coach Alisa
Cohn says you almost have to be forceful because friends’
desir e to protect you is often so strong: “Say, ‘I’m trying to
develop myself, and I know you love me, and I’d appreciate
your candid feedback about my limitations.’ And they’ll say,
‘You don’t have any,’ and you say, ‘No, I’m serious .’ You
have to get them to take it seriously . You have to cajole
them into it.”
One trick, she says, is to provide them with leads, so
they’r e not the one bringing up something negative: “You
can say, ‘I’ve gotten feedback in the past that I’m a tactical,
not a strategic think er. I’m wondering if you’ve seen that
and what you think.’ When you rat yourself out ﬁrst, they
can add on.”
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 28 ---
Arranging Your Focus Group
In addition to (or instead of) one-on-one conversations,
another possibility is hosting a small group gathering. This
only works if your network is geographically proximate, but
the beneﬁt is that you can leverage the wisdom of crowds
when one person’s idea sparks another . But instead of a
Madison Avenue ad agency testing a new soda campaign or
Procter & Gamble probing which scent is more “shower
fresh,” this is a focus group wher e the focus is you. Here’s
the setup.
Identif y a group of about ﬁfteen trusted friends and
colleagues (eight to ten is the ideal number of attendees,
and you know several won’t be able to make it, and a few
others will back out the day of the gathering). Tell them that
you’d like to interview them about your brand and that
you’r e conducting a focus group to get honest feedback
because you want to grow professionally . (If you have
another friend who’s also interested in reinventing herself,
you can suggest swapping the host duties for the focus
group. You can take charge of inviting her friends and
colleagues, and vice versa. That may help if you’re shy;
after all, it’s often easie r to do things for some one else,
rather than yourself .)
But what if you don’t have a friend you can turn to? The
idea of arranging a focus group—wher e you’r e the subject of
discussion—can seem hopelessly intimidating. What if your
friends and colleagues consider it an imposition? (If they
don’t want to do it, don’t worry; they’ll ﬁnd an excuse to beg
oﬀ.) And is it really such a good idea to invite a large group
of people to get togethe r and point out your weaknesses?
What if you discover that someone you respect has a
negative perception of you—that you’r e irresponsible or
unfocused, or a bad manager?

--- PAGE 29 ---
The prospect  of facing a harsh truth can be daunti ng. But
remember : your friends and colleagues wouldn’t bother to
participate if they didn’t care about you and value you.
Everyone has strengths and weaknesses, and your posse is
coming together because they want to help you become as
successful as possible. Indeed, regardless of whether you
hold a focus group, these  are likely the people you’re going
to need to rely on in your personal reinvention. Why not
involve them in the process now and get their support?
They’r e your best hope of honest feedback about your
strengths and weaknesse s, how you’r e currently perceived,
and other intelligence that can save you time and energy in
identif ying your path forwar d. Even more importantly,
they’r e your allies—the ones you’ll turn to for mentoring,
feedback, and (eventually) new business and referrals. It
may seem like an imposition to reach out, but the truth is, it
takes a village to r einvent yourself .
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 30 ---
Making It W ork
Instead of a focus group facility—they’r e very fancy, usually
located in nondescript oﬃce parks or skyscrapers, and have
confer ence rooms with a mirrored wall so the client can
observe everything from a darkened room—your living room
will probably  have to suﬃce. Make sure you have enough
comfortable chairs and, just as in real focus groups, bribe
people with dinner and/or copious, high-quality snacks.
Order plent y. Real focus groups also generally pay
participants $50–$100 for a few hours’ work, but your
friends are doing it as a favor to you. (However, if you’r e
able, it’s still a classy gesture to give a small token of your
appreciation, lik e a gif t card for coﬀee or a bookstor e.)
Because these folks are participating in your focus group
out of the goodness of their hearts, don’t abuse it. Keep the
length to ninety minutes  and be strict about timing. Allow
thirty minute s up front as a cushion for late arrivals, and for
people to mingle and snack. Then you’ve got sixty minutes
to probe the questions you most want answers to—how
you’r e perceived, your strengths and weaknesses, what kind
of jobs or envir onments people can most see you in, and so
on. Two roles are critical here: the facilitator and the scribe.
If you’r e a terriﬁc moderator—you can keep meetings going
eﬃciently, shut ramblers up politely, probe interesting
statements—then go for it. But for most people, it’s tricky to
handle, especially when the subject is you. Inste ad, tap a
friend or cowork er you think excels in this area (whose
meetings do you actually enjoy going to?), and see if they’d
be willing to help.
A good  role for you if you’re not facilitating is to be the
scribe. Sit silently in the back, don’t interrupt, and just take
notes on what people are saying. Write down anything that
seems interesting or important (it’s also a good idea, with

--- PAGE 31 ---
permission, to record the session so you can play it back
and review it in the future). You may want to interrupt or
argue, depen ding on what’s said, but your job is to stay
quiet. Instead, work out an ar rangement in advance with the
moderator so you can slip him notes with questions and he
can follow up on any k ey points.
You may also want to build in ﬁve minutes at the end of
the session and request that attendees write down a short
summary of their perceptions (three words that describe
you, the most important skill you should work on
developing, and so on). Some participants, despite your
entreaties, may be too shy to verbalize their thoughts, so
this is a good way to ensur e you’ve captur ed their insights.
Arranging your own focus group takes work, and it’s not
for everyone.  But it can yield interesting insights rapidly and
get allies on your side as you pr epare to r ebrand.
Try This
 
Make a list of the ﬁfteen people you’r e going to invite to
your focus gr oup.
What are the most important questions you want to
ask? (Aim for four to six.)
Who’s your moderator?
Mary’s F ocus Group

--- PAGE 32 ---
Mary Skelton Roberts had built an international career
as a conﬂict resolution expert.1 But eight years ago, she
found herself back in the United States looking for a new
challenge. “I felt like I had given conﬂict resolution all I
had and it was time to explor e something else,” she
recalls. She mentioned her quest to her friend Don, who
ﬂoated the idea of a personal focus group. When Don
oﬀered to run one for Mary, she immediately agr eed.
He suggested she invite participants “who knew me
really well and could speak about me in diﬀer ent phases
of my life,” Mary recalls. So she developed a list of ten
names: her “dream team” of friends and advisers who
would provide honest feedback, ranging from childhood
friends to college buddies, and from professional
colleagues to siblings.
Though some might have felt trepidation about
inviting colleagues to analyze and evaluate them, Mary
didn’t hesitate: “My friends already give me feedback
and advice, so even if it isn’t usually this scripted, I
already have  that kind of relationship with the people I
approached. Also, people said that one of my biggest
strengths was the ability to listen and give thoughtful
feedback, so some may have viewed it as an
opportunity to recipr ocate and help me out.” All ten
agreed to come.
They sat in her living room, plied with snacks, and
began ﬁlling out four worksheets Don distributed. The
top of the worksheets wer e labeled:
 
Mary’s Gr eatest Gif ts Are . . .
I Could See Mary . . .
The W orld W ould Be a Better Place If Mary . . .
I Will Help Mary by . . .

--- PAGE 33 ---
For several hours, Don led the conversation, asking
participants to share their responses for each question.
Mary sat silently, taking it in. “All I could do was listen,”
she says. “I was able to ask clarif ying questions or ask
for more information, but it was in the spirit of taking it
in, not r esponding or critiquing.”
Mary found the process revelatory . Other people
“almost have  a bird’s-eye view, and they can see your
life in ways you may not be able to, because you’re
involved in day-to-day living.” The participants praised
her communication and leadership skills, and urged her
to think broadly about how to translate them: “They
could see me working for a political campaign or writing
a children’s book.” (Mary is now a senior program oﬃcer
at a major foundation.)
The session focused on strengths, not weaknesses.
But Mary nonetheless picked up important clues  from
the conversation. “Ther e was a sense among people
that I was a highly creative person and should be doing
more in that space,” she says. “My interpr etation of that
is that I can be very intellectual, and maybe there
should be mor e of a balance with cr eativity .”
Perhaps the most startling insights were about her
personal life: “It was the ﬁrst time somebody said out
loud, ‘I want to see you with a child; I think you should
explor e it.’ Up until that point, I wasn’t sure I wanted to
have kids, but that comm ent made it more relevant for
me, and something I should be thinking about more
carefully .”
After the session, she sat down with her professional
coach and developed a six-month and yearlong plan
following up on the insights and advice she’d received,
from increasing her connections to other consultants to
doing more work locally . The focus group, says Mary,

--- PAGE 34 ---
“took me to the next level in terms of my professional
development. It helped me refocus my consulting
practice to include more training and developm ent,
which I loved doing and was really good at.” But the
most important change was personal. A year and a half
later, her daughter was bor n.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 35 ---
Your Online Presence
These days, a major part of your personal brand is online.
Sure, your friends and colleagues’ perceptions are based on
your day-to-day interactions, but if you have even minor
celebrity (you blog for an industry website) or you’r e job
hunting (and people are doing basic backgr ound checks),
the broader world is forming its image of you courtesy of
Facebook and Google. Your ﬁrst step? Review ing—and
contr olling—your online paper trail, because if you don’t do
it ﬁrst, it may come back to haunt you.
In fact, the New York Times  proﬁled a company called
Social Intelligence, which “scrapes the internet for
everything prospective employees may have said or done
online in the past seven years” and assembles a dossier on
the candidate.2 It has ferreted out racist remarks, drug
references, sexually explicit material, and weapons
fetishists. Hopefully that’s not your shtick. But even if you’r e
not a gunrun ner or trolling for OxyContin on Craigslist (like
one job candidate Socia l Intelligence reviewed), you still
may not be in the clear .
Your online presence may be spit-polished, with only your
wise quotations in industry journals and incisive blog posts
about the futur e of business. Then again, you may not
appear online exactly as you’d like to be perceived. Your
plight may be banal—you ’re a fanatical runner and the only
thing that comes up is your race times. It may be your
parents’ fault (if your name is Joe Smith, search engine
optimization is a cruel joke). It may be someone else’s fault
(one guy I know was plagued ﬁrst by sharing the same
name as a former MTV Asia VJ and later a congressman
forced to r esign due to a se x scandal).

--- PAGE 36 ---
But sometim es the pictur e that emer ges is downright
frightening, as was the case with a young woman I once met
with as a favor to a friend. She was obviously smart, just
ﬁnishing graduate school at an Ivy League university and
looking for a position in mark eting. We had a good  chat, but
at the end of the meeting, she leaned in and lower ed her
eyes. “Ther e’s something else I should mention,” she said.
“I’m not sure if you Googled me befor e we met, but . . .
there are some negative things being said about me online.”
It turns out she had a deranged ex-boyfriend who was
posting defamatory things about her online. Because of her
distinctive name, his rants littered any online search—and
made her life and job search very diﬃcult (she was pursuing
legal action). Of course, the fulminations of a jilted ex
shouldn’t be part of your personal brand. But thanks to the
internet, even the most private of matters can quickly
attach to your public persona.3
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 37 ---
Don’t Stop at F acebook
Review everything, because companies like Social
Intelligence will. They report that less than a third of the
content they dredge up comes from major sites like
Facebook or Twitter . Instead, they trawl lesser-known
spaces, wher e it may feel “safer ” to post—and lead
candidates to mistak es. Comments on old blog posts,
bulletin boards, Craigslist ads, or old Yahoo! Groups archives
are all targets, not to mention photos and videos (which
may have been uploaded by friends with poorer judgment
than your own).
In addition to your ﬁrst pass, you may want to have
someone else review the data as well. Everyone knows a
pictur e of you with a bong is probably ill advised. But some
people might feel that membership in a “This Is America—I
Shouldn’t Have to Press 1 for English” Facebook group is
witty, while others could see it as racist. (Yes, that was a
real case vetted by Social Intelligence.) Getting another
perspective can help you discover blind spots and areas
wher e your idea of “just a joke” could be badly
misinterpr eted.
Try This
 
Search for yourself not just on Google, but also on other
search engines such as Bing and membership sites (that
may have various privacy settings) lik e Facebook.
Search for your name in quotation marks—as in “Dorie
Clark”—so you’ll only ﬁnd hits with that exact phrase.
(Otherwise, you may turn up any document, however
long, that happens to have both words in it.) Don’t

--- PAGE 38 ---
forget to search for variations of your name, including
common misspellings or nicknames.
Don’t give up too soon. Scroll through every page,
because you may ﬁnd a smoking gun on page twenty-
six of your Google search. If something malicious, false,
or inappr opriate is out there, someone’s going to ﬁnd it
eventually, and for your sak e, it better be you.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 39 ---
Seek Out Patterns in Past
Performance
You may also have access to hard data about how others
perceive you, namely, perfor mance reviews from your job
(or previous ones). Not every employer has its act together
enough to requir e formal sit-downs and evalua tions, so
don’t worry if it’s just not available. But especially  in larger
organizations, you’r e likely to have a paper trail. (If you’ve
applied to graduate programs or for speciﬁc fellowships, you
may also have access to recommendation letters others
have written for you, which are a treasur e trove of
intelligence.)
First, gather the material, and then take a step back.
You’re going to have opinions about everyone who’s written
a word about you. Mayb e your former boss claimed you
were fanatically detail- oriented, but you only acted that way
because she was so disor ganized; nothing would have
gotten done if you hadn’t  taken the reins. Maybe your grad
school professor criticized you for being late on a few
assignments, but didn’t take into account that your dad was
diagnosed with cancer that semester .
It’s natural to get defensive when you see yourself
evaluated on paper and attempt to justif y any criticisms. Try
not to. We’re not concer ned with one person’s hobbyhorse
issue (“Jeﬀ is a great employee, but he keeps confusing
‘there’ with ‘their’ in his memos!”). It’s when everyone (or
almost everyone) says your spelling, your micromanaging,
or your lateness is a problem that you should  take it
seriously, and do the same with your strengths. (Stein, the
former Radcliﬀe career counselor, observes that her clients

--- PAGE 40 ---
are often keenly awar e of their weaknesses, and ﬁnd it
much har der to appr eciate their positive attributes.)
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 41 ---
Are Y ou Too Likable?
One caveat is to be awar e of the “likability conundrum.”
Harvar d Business School Professor Amy Cuddy notes that
many people view warmth and competence as “inversely
related”—that is, if you’r e very nice, you must be a little
dumb.4 That’s bad news for female executives, who are
often stereotyped as, and culturally trained to be, extremely
warm.
Indeed, a study in a psychology journal revealed that in
perfor mance evaluations of junior attor neys at a Wall Street
law ﬁrm, “technical competence was more heavily weighted
in men’s numerical rating s,” as compar ed to interpersonal
warmth for the female attor neys.5 Thus, while the women
were lauded much more eﬀusively in the comments section,
the men received higher overall numerical ratings (and you
can guess which was given more weight in deter mining
promotions).
I remember once overhearing a reference interview for a
woman named Kelly, whose former boss praised her as “a
wonderful girl” with a “terriﬁc personality” and who was a
“delight to work with.” It was clear the boss thought highly
of Kelly and wanted to help her win this coveted  new job.
But at the end of the interview, Kelly sounded very nice—
and very weak. No man would ever be described  in those
terms, and if she were up against a male candidate whose
reference instead praised his “extraor dinary competence”
and “passion for winning ,” I was pretty sure I knew who’d
get the job.
So be on the lookout for stereotypes that may crop up.
They may or may not be accurate (every woman isn’t warm,
every Frenchman isn’t aloof, every gay man isn’t witty), but
they’r e probably shaping how others view you.

--- PAGE 42 ---
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 43 ---
Bring It T ogether
Finally, synthesize your data. Any high-quality pollster
strives to get a representa tive sample (if you have too many
senior citizen s or not enough Hispanics in the pool, your
result can be dramatically skewed). Similarly, be sure you’r e
assigning the appropriate  weight to each variable; rather
than obsessi ng about something one person mentioned,
you’r e looking for patter ns. It’s easy for something negative
to stick in your craw (one friend has quoted a critical review
of her work to me so many times that I can recite it
verbatim, and it was written a decade ago). But the power
of one harsh appraisal can cloud your understanding of how
you’r e perceived in gene ral. Remember : you’r e looking for
patter ns and tr ends.
Ask yourself  the following questions, and make sure
you’r e taking  into account every category—360 interviews,
your focus group, your online presence, and perfor mance
reviews and r ecommendation letters:
 
What adjectiv es—both positive and negative—do people
use to describe me?
What skills do they say I have—or lack?
What aspects about me or my brand are most
frequently talk ed about?
Are any aspects of me or my brand cited as unique or
unusual?
Now, most importantly, you have to deter mine whether
you like what you hear. Begin to think about what words you
want  peopl e to link you with. Notes Cohn, “Maybe people
say, ‘I see you as thoughtful, methodical, and nice.’ Those
are lovely professional qualities, but it’s not a leadership
brand like ‘decisive.’ It’s not bad, but it’s not going to get

--- PAGE 44 ---
you to the C-suite.” Our job in the next chapter is to help
you identif y wher e you want to go—whether it’s the C-suite
of your current company or into a new ﬁeld altoget her—and
begin to r eshape your brand to get ther e.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 45 ---
REMEMBER:
    If three people say you’r e a horse, buy a saddle. In
other words, whether or not you believe a perception
about you is true, if enoug h people share it, you’d better
take it seriously .
    Personal focus groups  with friends and colleagues
can reveal telling insights about you. Think seriously
about organizing a gathering or at least approaching
trusted colleagues individually to get their perspective.
    Make it safe for others to give feedback that’s real. If
you can tell they’r e sugar coating, beg them for the truth
and ask paired questions that let them talk about a
strength and a weakness.
    Google yourself, and don’t stop on the ﬁrst page of
search engin e results. Check to make sure there are no
smoking guns or false information about you online. (If
there are, contact the site administrator and nicely ask
for it to be removed. If he stonewalls, you may
eventually need to involve a lawyer .)
    Don’t give too much credence to outlying opini ons;
instead, watch for patter ns.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 46 ---
CHAPTER 3
Research Your Destination
Now that you have a better grasp of your current brand and
the strengths and weakne sses that go along with it, it’s time
to resear ch your next move. If you already have a working
theory (I want to transition from project management to
sales), you can test and investigate it befor e diving in. And if
you’r e still unsur e what’s  next, this is your chance  to spark
ideas and gather new insights so you can better evaluate
opportunities down the r oad.
One caveat is that, at this point in your reinvention, it’s
often a good idea to keep a low proﬁle. Later on, once
you’ve solidiﬁed your brand, you’ll want to shout it from the
rooftops (that’s how you can win clients for your new
business or get a plum job oﬀer wher e you can utilize your
new skills). But at this early stage, you may not have a fully
formed sense of wher e you’r e going, and that uncertainty
has the potential to confuse others.
As San Francisco–based executive coach Rebecca Zuck er
notes, “if you’r e not sure what’s next, you still need  to come
across in a way that inspir es conﬁdence and makes other
people want to help you. Y ou can’t go out into the world lost,
because no one will want to spend social capital on your
behalf .” The secret, instead, is to slow down and deter mine
wher e you r eally want to invest your ener gy.
In this chapter, we’ll talk about ways to crystallize your
futur e direction. W e’ll cover :

--- PAGE 47 ---
 
Why you may need to tak e time oﬀ ﬁrst
How to conduct behind-the-scenes r esear ch
How to win friends and not alienate people through
informational interviews
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 48 ---
Take a Break
If you’r e been suﬀering through an unsatisf ying job or
career, you may be eager  to get on with the rest of your life.
That was certainly the case for one woman who visited
Phyllis Stein, the career counselor . “She’d been a solo
veterinarian for fourteen years,” recalls Stein, “and she was
on call seven days a week for those fourteen years. I
literally had never met anyone in my life who had work ed
like that, not even doctors and lawyers.” The woman was
miserable; when Stein asked about her career aspirations,
her ﬁrst words were, “I don’t ever want to see another
animal again.” She wanted to start planning her next move,
but Stein insisted she wait: “I said, ‘I don’t think you should
even try to ﬁgure out what you’r e going to do next. You
should go away for nine months of vacation, to make up for
the vacations you didn’t  have in fourteen years, and you
can come back next September .’ She was in a burned-out
condition wher e creative thinking just wasn’t possible.”
Sure enough, when the woman returned the following
year, she was simultan eously more relaxed and more
focused. “She very quickly found a new direction for herself
that was incredibly creative,” says Stein, beco ming an
international public health veterinarian, which allowed her
to travel the world helping animals.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 49 ---
Your Behind-the-Scenes Research
In the pre-internet dark ages, it was almost impossible to
decipher nontraditional career trajectories. How did she get
a job like that? What kind of training did he have?  Unless
you knew them persona lly or were a reporter and could
badger some one for a bio and press kit, you’d never know .
Needless to say, some of the most exciting jobs don’t have
a clear path.
But things are diﬀer ent these days. In the post- Google
era, you can make massive resear ch headway befor e even
talking to a live person. I know one successful executive
who’s made a habit of “stalking the biographies” of people
he admir es. The best way to get wher e they are, he
decided, was to emulate them—e xactly . From becoming a
White House Fellow to developing a taste for marathons, he
matched their regimen for success. Obsessive, yes, but he’s
barely into his thirties, widely lauded in the media, and has
already raised over $1 million for charity with his running.
Reading is, of course, another main resear ch channel. You
can take a page from Bill Gates who, as described by Steven
Johnson in his excellent Wher e Good Ideas Come From,
takes two weeklong “reading vacations” each year, wher e
he plunges into the stack he’s been collecting. So save up
your list of titles (from friends’ recommendations, reviews in
industry magazines, or Amazon’s algorithms) and make sure
you’r e conversant with the leading books in your ﬁeld
befor e you start networking with people.
There are four immediate beneﬁts. First, particu larly if
you’r e diving into biogra phies or memoirs, you can get a
better sense  of whether or not a given ﬁeld is for you
(Michael Lewis’s Liar’s Poker, for instance, has given
generations a taste of life on Wall Street). Second, your
immersion will help you master the terminology; the jargon

--- PAGE 50 ---
thick et can be dense in some ﬁelds, and you’ll want to
sound credible. Third, you may pick up some fun anecdotes
to share as you’r e schmo ozing, which can help you grease
the wheels of social interaction.
Finally, you’ll be able to ask better, more-informed
questions once you start meeting with other professionals to
talk about your goals. Stein tells her clients, “If one of the
things they’r e exploring is being a lawyer, I don’t want them
going to a lawyer and asking a dumb question like ‘What’s it
like to be a lawyer?’” Executive coach Michael Melcher
agrees: “You want to show that you’ve done your homework
—that you’ve taken it as far as possible befor e talking with
the person,” and urges people to consider the “highest and
best use” of the person they’re interviewing. In other words,
if you can ﬁnd out certain information online or through
books, don’t waste a professional’s time with it. You want to
ask the person more sophisticated, reﬁned questions
(instead of “Wher e can I go for training?” think “I’d like your
advice on choosing between two diﬀer ent revenue
models”).
Try This
 
Make a list of the people  you think are doing the most
interesting things (anyone from famous business
leaders to your neighbo r who lived in Bangk ok for a
year).
Stalk their bios online. You can usually ﬁnd them on the
“about” page of their company’s website, but you may
also have to do some detective work. If they’r e well-
known, read news articles to familiarize yourself  with
their car eer pr ogression.

--- PAGE 51 ---
Identif y patter ns. If every person you admir e is a
Rotarian, maybe you should think about joining. If they
all raise money to ﬁght breast cancer, you can build a
solid network by pitching in.
Brainstor m a tentative list of goals, based on your idols.
You can reﬁne them later (and we’ll work together to
ﬁgure out the “how”). But now’s the time to think big:
visiting at least ﬁfty countries, getting your own radio
talk show, raising a million dollars for charity, being
named partner, or whatever most appeals to you.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 52 ---
Informational Interviews
Armed with your behind-the-scenes resear ch, you’r e ﬁnally
ready to talk shop with actual experts. Informational
interviews are an unbeat able opportunity to netw ork with
people who are doing what you want to do, to ask real-time
questions about what their profession is like, and to weed
out bad choices. (Friends of friends and your alumni network
are usually the best starting places for people to meet with.)
Karen Landolt, a corpora te attor ney who transitio ned to
running a university career services oﬃce, requir es her
students to conduct at least four informational interviews
and report back on them. She recalls, “I’d have people come
to me and say, ‘I want to work at Goldman Sachs,’ and I’d
say, ‘Great, who have you talked to there?’ They’d say no
one, but they make a lot of money . And I’d say ‘Yes, but they
work 120 hours a week—and have you talked to anyone at 3
a.m.?’”
There’s a risk to informational interviews, however, that
most people don’t recogn ize: if you don’t know how to do
them well, you can torpedo the relationship if you don’t
make a good ﬁrst impr ession. Her e are six steps to follow .
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 53 ---
Step 1: Be Clear about the Help Y ou’re Asking F or
As a favor to friends, I’ll sometimes do informational
interviews with folks they know who are breaking into the
workfor ce or looking to change jobs. The people are
generally delightful, and I’d love to help them, but many are
so vague that I honestly don’t know how. When you need a
job and aren’t totally sure what you want, it can seem like a
good strategy to leave yourself open to fate. “I’d like
something in communications.” Well, yes . . . but what kind
of communications job? Mark eting? Advertising? Public
relations? For a nonpr oﬁt? A big corporation? In health care?
Consumer products? It becomes a monumental task to even
think about how to pr ovide assistance.
It’s far easier to help people with speciﬁc, targeted
requests. Francine, who took a mark eting class I taught at
Tufts Univers ity, asked for advice on getting “a job in
mark eting for a food-r elated business.” Thanks to her
speciﬁcity, it was immediately appar ent how I could help. I
set her up with informational interviews with my friend
Stephen, a restaurant consultant, and Larry, who ran an
artisanal chocolate company . She ended up helping Larry
with some product demonstrations and he connected her
with an inter nship.
But what if you aren’t sure what you want or you’r e
interested in multiple potential careers? Just make
something up for now. Being speciﬁc will expand your
options, not limit them. People are likely to say, “I don’t
know anyone in New England archaeology, but if you like
historic preservation, I know someone who works at the
Victorian Society.” You want to paint a pictur e so clear that
your contacts are thinking about real-life people they know
who can help you.

--- PAGE 54 ---
Finally, a caveat—you’r e likely to hurt your cause  if your
informational interview is actually a bait and switch. Don’t
call up your contacts for a casual get-together , only to
surprise them  with the news that you, too, want to get into
their ﬁeld. Instead, be up front about your motives and
they’ll lik ely say yes.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 55 ---
Step 2: Respect the F act That They’re Doing Y ou a
Favor
Let’s face it: you’r e the one asking for someone else’s time,
so you want to make it very convenient for him. Let him pick
the date, time, and location, and be sure to pay for his drink
or meal. (I’ve heard some friends who are unemployed
grouse about spending money taking out folks who are
earning a healthy paycheck, which is exactly the wrong
perspective. Their hourly rate is probably high enough that
it’s costing them hundr eds of dollars in lost productivity to
meet with you. The least you can do is buy them a damn
cup of coﬀee.)
You also want be sure you’re not misusing their gener osity
by taking too much time. Says Landolt, who estimates she’s
done well over a hundr ed informational interviews in the
past decade, “If they say they have twenty minutes, I’ll k eep
track. I’ll say, ‘It’s been twenty minutes, and if you have
more time, I have more questions, but if not, I want to
respect your time.’”
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 56 ---
Step 3: Ask the Right Questions
Here’s the wrong one: do you have any jobs for me?
Because if they don’t, it’ll shut down the discussion
permanently . Good questions reﬂect a basic understanding
of the ﬁeld (you’re not bothering them with banal questions)
and focus on their lived experience, so you can get a sense
of what their job is r eally lik e. Stein suggests questions lik e:
 
What is your typical day like? Typical week? (And if
there’s no such thing, ask them to describe the most
recent.)
What do you lik e most and least about your job?
What does it take to be successful in this ﬁeld? In this
company?
What is the average salary range at this level?
I’m planning the following steps towar d obtaining a job
in this ﬁeld (name them). Have I overlook ed any
strategy or r esour ce you think might be helpful?
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 57 ---
Step 4: Leave with Other Names
You can learn from salesp eople here: be sure to ask if there
are other people in the company or in the ﬁeld they think
you should connect with, and would they be willing  to make
an introduction? LinkedIn is also helpful here, because you
can easily see if your colleagues have connections to, for
example, other mark eters, Comcast employ ees, or
specialists in Argentinean  cultur e. And don’t forget alumni
networks, whether they’r e from college, grad school, or
former employers.
Recalls Landolt, “When I was making a transition, I was at
a huge ﬁrm with 450 attor neys and a turnover rate of about
70 percent. There were attor neys all over who had work ed
there, and I used the network, because we’d been through
the same war. We didn’t know each other, but I’d talk to
current empl oyees at the ﬁrm and ask, ‘Can you introduce
us?’ And they’d say sur e.”
Try This
 
Write down your one-se ntence positioning statement
that you can share with others. (If you have multiple
possible goals, create one for each.) An example might
be, “I’m exploring a transition from intellectual property
law to entertainment law,” or “I’d like to learn more
about how others have handled moving from manager
to vice pr esident, and what skills ar e necessary .”
Spend an hour at a bookstor e (online or real-world)
searching for titles that intrigue you. Make a list of at

--- PAGE 58 ---
least a half-dozen books  you plan to read. Buy them
now, or r equest them fr om the library .
Write down a list of ten people you’ll ask for an
informational interview . E-mail thr ee of them right now .
Make a list of the ﬁve to ten questions you intend to ask,
so you can get the maximum value from your
informational interview . Don’t forget to include
questions that help you learn more about the person as
an individual, so you can identif y ways to stay in touch
and possibly help them in the futur e.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 59 ---
Step 5: K eep the Connection Alive
Write your thank you note; it does make an impact.
Elizabeth Amini, an online entrepreneur, recalls that after
one informational interview, “a year later, when I went into
that oﬃce, my thank you note was pinned to the wall.” But,
while most people treat informational interviews as stepping
stones to job leads or onetime data infusions, the real goal
is turning a thirty -minute meeting over coﬀee into a
relationship. One of my favorite business books from the
1980s is Harvey Mack ay’s Swim with the Sharks Without
Being Eaten Alive . Mackay ran an envelop e company—the
ultimate commodity business—yet was able to prosper by
diﬀer entiating his ﬁrm through great service. He mandated
that his employees use “The Mack ay 66,” a list of questions
that they should answer about their customers, not through
a onetime interrogation, but by getting to know them over
time.
During your informationa l interview, in addition to facts
about a person’s job, you ideally want to form the building
blocks of an ongoing relationship by ﬁnding out key details
you can follow up on. Maybe they’r e just back from a
vacation to Fiji, or you both like the Dodgers, or your kids
went to the same school. That’s your starting point, so mak e
a point of sending them interesting travel articles, shooting
them a note when their team makes the playoﬀs, or inviting
them to sit with you at the school fund-raiser . With each
interaction, strive to learn more about them so your
relationship becomes more three-dimensional. The process
of learning someone’s hometown, college, names and ages
of children, favorite hobb ies, favorite restaurants, previous
jobs, and long-range goals provides a raft of opportunities to

--- PAGE 60 ---
connect with her over shared interests and keep up a
dialogue.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 61 ---
Step 6: Master the F ollow-Up
Just as your contacts are helping you, you want to try to add
value to their lives. Maybe it’s oﬀering to introduce them to
someone else you’ve met who’s also originally from Boise or
Berlin or Beijing. Maybe it’s providing them with a helpful
connection (one friend who asked for my assistance in
preparing for a job interview seriously impressed me with
her networking chops when she later connected me with a
prominent business contact she’d met at church). And
maybe it’s just being an encouraging voice. I try to make a
point of congratulating colleagues when I see they’ve been
quoted in a magazine or the local business jour nal.
Another great excuse to keep in touch with your contacts
is integral to the “viral” natur e of your informational
interviews. After you’ve met with someone, be sure to follow
up with her—and the original person who referred you to
her. Says Rebecca Zuck er, the executive coach, “I always
encourage people to go back to the people who were
interviewed and thank them, and let them know, ‘Here are
some of the things I learned, and I’d love to talk more with
you as I progress’—mak e it an open feedback channel. You
can tell them, ‘Here are two to three things I’m going to be
working on.’”
Elizabeth Amini agrees. “The easiest thing is to be in
touch around major milestones,” she says. You can send
holiday greetings (“thank you for your mentorship this
year”), updates on advice they gave you, and relevant
articles (Eliza beth, while connecting with ventur e capitalists,
put out Google Alerts on the companies they were backing
and sent them inter esting clips). Sometimes opportunities to
connect simply present themselves. In the wake of the 2004
Asian tsunami, Elizabeth made a small, $10 donat ion in the
name of each of her mentors and sent them a short note

--- PAGE 62 ---
letting them know . “It wasn’t calculated at all,” she says,
“but I got the most responses ever. People were so
thankful.”
Conducting a slew of infor mational interviews might sound
stressful, but key to enjoying the process is keeping it in
perspective: “I like having lunch with people,” says Karen
Landolt. When she felt demoralized in her job as a corporate
lawyer, “it would give me something to look forwar d to. It
was almost therapeutic, and how I got through my days: at
least I get to have lunch with this inter esting person.”
Making Connections Y ou Never Thought W ere
Possible—Elizabeth’s Story
Elizabeth Amini thought she wanted to be a surgeon.
But after ﬁnishing college with a cognitive science
degree, she discover ed during a hospital internship  that
medicine was a bad ﬁt. After starting a graphic design
ﬁrm and later working for NASA, Amini found herself, at
thirty, unsur e of her direction. “I felt really lost,” she
recalls. “All my friends who were also pre-med had
graduated from medical school and were practicing , and
here I was, not knowing what career direction I should
take.”
She vowed to use a strategic approach to ﬁnd her
calling. She made a list of possible professions that
intrigued her and set out to obtain ﬁve to ten data
points, such as informational interviews, for each  one.
The problem? She didn’t have many contacts in her
target ﬁelds, so she had to get creative about
succeeding thr ough cold calls.
First, she’d search online to ﬁnd the right person to
talk to at each target company (she had identiﬁed large

--- PAGE 63 ---
companies based in her city through online research).
She’d type in the name of the company along with a
phrase like “inter nationa l business vice presiden t” in
order to get the right name. Then, she’d check the date
(to make sure it was a current role and he or she hadn’t
been promot ed or left the company) and try to glean
some salient information (for instance, that the
executive was heading up an expansion into South
America).
Next, she’d look up the company’s press oﬃce or
investor relations department online to ﬁnd the e-mail
address of the contact person, which would allow her to
deduce the company’s standar d e-mail patter n (for
instance, john.doe@company .com). She’d also continue
to dig to learn about the executive’s preferred
nickname. “When the name is Michael,” she says,
“sear ch on the web to see if they go by ‘Michael’ or
‘Mike.’ Otherwise, the secretary is going to think,
‘Nobody calls him that; you probably don’t know him.’”
Finally, she’d  call the main company line after hours to
get the voice-mail directory in order to learn the
executive’s voice-mail e xtension.
Armed with this information, she was ﬁnally ready to
make her move. She could e-mail or, even better, call
directly. “When you call and ask for an extension
number directly, they never question why you’r e calling
the way they do if you ask for someone by name,” she
says. Also, she recommends calling just befor e or just
after business hours, when secretaries are unlikely to be
at their desks, but hardworking executives may be
around. “It’s important to realize the secretary is there
to screen you out, so you want to avoid the secretary as
much as possible,” she says.
It would have  been easy for her to target low-rank ing
employees. But Elizabeth resisted the impulse.

--- PAGE 64 ---
“Everybody tells you to start with people you know, one
or two degrees of separation,” she says. “But chances
are the people you know are in middle manageme nt, or
maybe just a few years out of university .” If you really
want to get to know what  an industry’s like, you have to
talk to seasoned veterans.
The CEO—t he public face of the company—is
bombar ded with requests . That’s why Elizabeth started
her initial resear ch one notch lower, with the oﬃce of
the chief operating oﬃcer, “because that secretary
knows everybody,” she says. Her goal wasn’t actually to
score an interview with the COO, which was probably
unlikely. Instead, it was to get his imprimatur : “You can
say, I know the COO is probably not the right person to
talk to, but who is your best salesperson, or your rock-
star marketing person? And then you can say the COO’s
oﬃce recommended them, and they’r e not going to
blow you oﬀ.”
Elizabeth learned quickly that the typical request
(thirty or sixty minutes of someone’s time) was usually
rejected. Busy executives aren’t going to crack open
their calendar for someone they have no r eal connection
to. Instead, she would warm them up with conte xt,
letting them know the COO’s oﬃce recommended them
and that she had r ead about them online.
Says Elizabeth, “If they have a book, read it, beca use
no one writes to these people and says, ‘I read your
book.’” Then tell them, “I was impressed by XYZ, and I’d
like to ask you some questions about how you became
so successful. Is it possible to schedule a ten-minute
phone call? Or, if you’r e free, I’d be happy to take you to
lunch.” Most  people will opt for the phone call, which
seems easy in compariso n to lunch, and now you have
an appointment on the books.

--- PAGE 65 ---
Another crucial point is timing. Most profession als’
schedules are heavily book ed for the next few weeks, so
Elizabeth discover ed if you ask for a calendar slot “in
the next week or two,” you’re likely to get turned down.
Meanwhile, asking to connect with them “sometime this
year” won’t seem urgent and, even if they agree, may
result in an eventual brush- oﬀ. Elizabeth suggests the
best time frame to reques t may be “this month or next,”
because there are likely to be unscheduled blocks still
available.
Elizabeth often had to persever e through blow- oﬀs or
rejections. “One guy said I needed to talk to someone
more junior, so I said, ‘I’d like insight from the most
successful person in the department, and that’s you.’ ”
That line won him over. Another person, in real estate
development, screamed at her and said, “I don’t have
time to talk to some f#*$@ student; I’m up to my neck
in lawsuits!” and hung up on her .
Says Elizabeth, “To me, that’s a data point. I got the
same information as I would have in a ten-minute
interview .” Another executive literally canceled on her
six times (“ther e was a pole vaulting championship, the
kids were sick, he was traveling,” Elizabeth recalls), but
she kept calling back. “Until I get a ‘No, never call me
again,’ this is in play,” she says. They eventually met.
Finally, she learned you have to be willing to say yes
to opportunity . Browsing the Forbes  500, she read about
a billionair e real estate mogul who lived in her city. She
called after 5:30 p.m. (post-secr etary hours), got him on
the phone, “and, oddly, he agreed to lunch,” she recalls.
She was thrilled with the opportunity, but shortly after
she got oﬀ the phone, she panick ed. “I said ‘Pick your
favorite place,’ but then I thought, wher e do billionair es
go for lunch? What if lunch is $1,000?” She decided to
proceed, despite the risks: “I’ll put it on my credit card,”

--- PAGE 66 ---
she thought, “and if it’s more than my rent, I’ll ﬁnd a
way to pay it oﬀ.” The mogul took her to a local deli (his
favorite spot) and lunch for two came to $17. He spent
an incredible ninety minutes with her and “outlined
exactly what it took to be him.”
Elizabeth’s informational interviews gave her insights
that continue to resonate  in her new career, runnin g an
online game start-up based on cutting-edge brain
resear ch. “You end up with all these random lessons
that are important, even if the person’s ﬁeld is not
relevant to you in the end,” she says.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 67 ---
REMEMBER:
    If you’r e unsur e of your futur e destination, you
might need some time oﬀ ﬁrst. It can be hard to think
creatively if you’r e bur ned out.
    Start resear ching your prospective job or industry
behind the scenes befor e you connect with people live.
Get conversant with the major blogs, and read popular
books that people in the ﬁeld will be familiar with. You’ll
want to be ready to meet them and have a
sophisticated conversation about the industry .
    Once you set up a meeting with someone, resear ch
them online. Check LinkedIn so you’r e awar e of mutual
connections (beyond the person who introduced you),
and identify other commonalities or aspects worth
commenting on (you once work ed at the same
company, or they’r e on the board of a charity you
support).
    Be on time for your informational interview . If you
arrive late, you’ve not only wasted their time, you’ve
also missed your opportunity to buy their coﬀee or
meal, a double faux pas.
    Put a reminder in your calendar to follow up with the
people you’r e meeting with: ﬁrst, to thank them right
away; next, a week or two later, to oﬀer some kind of
value (sending them an article you thought they’d like,
and so on); and then four to six weeks later, to update
them on your search and let them know how you’re
using their advice.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 68 ---
CHAPTER 4
Test-Drive Your Path
At this point, you’ve resear ched your new path thoroughly,
both behind  the scenes and through informational
interviews. You probably have a much better sense of what
areas interest you (consulting and ventur e capital sound
intriguing), and what potential pitfalls might lurk (I’m
interested in moving up to senior vice president, but can I
live with the travel requir ements?). Now’s the time for your
immersion e xperience.
It’s impossible to know if you’ll really like a new career
direction until you try it out. To avoid costly mistak es—and
wasting your energy—you  can take a short-ter m test-drive.
In this chapter, you’ll read about professionals who kick-
started their professional reinventions with a variety of
exploratory techniques, including:
 
Apprenticing
Volunteering
Job shadowing
Plus, we’ll cover :
 
How much time and money can you spend?
Dreaming big
The path isn’t always linear

--- PAGE 69 ---
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 70 ---
A p p r e n t i c i n g
When Joanne Chang graduated from Harvar d in 1991, she’d
been virtually swept into her ﬁrst job. As a math and
economics major, “it seemed natural to go into investment
banking or management consulting. In fact, they were really
the only two options Career Services oﬀered. There were big
presentations on campus,” she recalls. “Everybody  would go
to them and sign up for interviews; everybody tried to get in
on it.” When a blue-chip management consulting ﬁrm
oﬀered her a job, she grabbed it.
But two years later, much of it spent on the road advising
companies spanning every industry from insurance to
telecom, she knew it wasn’t her calling. “Ther e wasn’t an
immediate sense of accomplishment,” she says. “I’d take
part in big projects and there was a fair amount of busy
work. I’d think, ‘this isn’t helping the client.’” She’d always
been interested in cooking (at Harvar d, she’d become
known as “the chocolate  chip cookie girl”) and decided to
give it a try. “I sent a bunch of letters to chefs in town that I
didn’t know, but I knew their reputation,” she says. “I said, ‘I
have no formal trainin g, but I love cooking and I’m
interested in getting into the restaurant world, and I’ll take
any position.’”
Impressed with her chutzpah, intrigued by her résumé,
and short an employee who had just left, Boston power chef
Lydia Shire called Chang  literally the next day and invited
her for an interview . She got the job and started as “a
bottom- of-the-ladder prep cook,” tutor ed by a sous chef who
“trained me, showed me recipes and what I needed to do:
how to set up the station, what the dishes should look like.”
After three months, she work ed her way up to her ﬁrst job
as a line cook.

--- PAGE 71 ---
The transition wasn’t always easy. “It’s grimy, hard,
physical labor,” she says. “It can be mundane, and there’s a
lot of stress.” But she soon realized the food industry was
wher e she wanted to be: “I remember clearly telling one of
my consulting friends how exciting it was to be surrounded
by people who were passionate about their work. When you
cook, you’r e not making any money, so when you do it, it’s
people who are there because they love cooking.” And
unlike the spreadsheets she created as a consultant, her
work in the kitchen had a direct impact: “You make a
terrine, you slice it up, put it on a plate, and the server
comes back and says they loved the terrine. It was an
immediate gratiﬁcation I hadn’t had up to that point in my
career.”
Today, Chang  is the impresario behind Flour, a chain of
three acclaimed bakeries in the Boston area, and the co-
owner (with husband Christopher Myers) of the upscale
Asian restaurant Myers+Chang. Now she’s on the other side
of the equation, hiring (as Lydia Shire did) people of all ages
wanting to break into the restaurant industry, and she’s
more convinced than ever that apprenticeships are critical.
She says:
There are misconceptions  about what it’s like to be in
the food business. Many people want to reinvent
themselves in this industr y without a real understanding
of what it’s like because of what they witnessed on Food
TV or from going to restaurants or bakeries. But if you’r e
going to make a big chan ge in your life, it’s impe rative
to spen d some time working in the ﬁeld befor e making a
jump—you know, “I used to be a doctor but I love to
cook, so now I’m going to be a chef .”
I’ve seen so many people come to work for us as career
changers and after a year or two, they say, ‘Wow, it’s not
what I want to do.’ It’s a business and people have to

--- PAGE 72 ---
recognize that. I think it can be danger ous to take a hobby
and make it into a career, because it’s not always  fun. This
isn’t home wher e you can make a cake and if it’s not that
great, people still love it because you made them a cake.
Here, people pay money and I don’t know them—so they’r e
not going to give us the beneﬁt of the doubt.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 73 ---
Volunteering to Build Experience
At the time of her career transition, Joanne was young and
single, and she was willing to tak e a low-wage job in or der to
learn new skills. It’s a great path if you can aﬀord it. But
even if you can’t, volunteering on nights and week ends
provides an opportunity for any professional to build skills
and get a taste of new possibilities.
Rebecca Zucker, the San Francisco–based executive
coach, says of volunteering, “It allows you to network with a
new gr oup of people in your tar get ar ea, it helps you to k eep
your skill set fresh or build a new skill set, it’s something
you can put on a résumé— and it shows your commitment to
a particular path.” She recalls one client who wanted to
explor e clean  tech, a popular industry in Silicon Valley that
was hard to break into without previous experience. “He
volunteer ed to do resear ch for a private equity ﬁrm in a
certain niche  within clean tech,” she recounts. “Not only did
he learn a ton and have something to put on his résumé, it
was instrumental in helping him get a job in the ﬁeld.”
Volunteering can be beneﬁcial even within your own
company, because it allows you the opportunity to meet
new people and expand their perception of you. New York–
based executive coach Alisa Cohn suggests stepping up for
committees that will allow you to broaden your contacts and
build connect ions with people in diﬀer ent departme nts: “You
could volunteer for the diversity committee, or the company
picnic. You can volunteer  for any press function or global
committee. It might feel thankless, but what you’r e getting
is a broader network and the experience of doing something
diﬀer ent. It’s especially good if you feel like you’ve been
boxed in or pigeonholed. If you’r e in engineering or ﬁnance
and want to get more experience in mark eting or strategic

--- PAGE 74 ---
planning to expand your skills, they can’t stop you because
you’r e volunteering.”
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 75 ---
Joining a Board
One of the best ways for professionals to broaden their
résumés is to join a nonpr oﬁt board. That was certainly
Karin Turer’s experience. As a junior -level staﬀer at an
organization for the homeless, it never occur red to her to
join the board of directors of another nonpr oﬁt, until a friend
told her about an opening at MassBik e, the statewide
bicycling advocacy group. “My friend said, ‘You’re biking all
the time, you should do this,’ and I thought it sounded
great,” said Karin. “I sort of saw it as my civic duty, that if
I’m going to be biking a lot, I should be involved to make it
better .”
At ﬁrst, serving on the board just seemed like a fun way to
pursue her passions. She’d been to a bike event  in Maine
and thought MassBik e should replicate it as a fund-raiser .
When the board agreed, she was delighted. “I went into it
assuming there would be a lot of other people helping out
with the event,” she recalls. But the truth about small,
understaﬀed organization s slowly hit her: “It really turned
out it was just me.” With her reputation (and the
organization’s) on the line, she went into overdrive to
ensur e the event’s success. “It was absolutely insane,” she
says. “I created and directed all the aspects. We designed
and planned ten ride routes, we solicited sponsorships, did
the publicity, communicated with the police and town
oﬃcials and got the permitting, and did volunteer
recruitment and management.”
The event—best known for the “Pie Race” Karin designed,
featuring a timed race that measur ed riders’ alacrity both
on their bikes and in wolﬁng down pie slices—became a
fund-raising hit for MassB ike, running successfully for ﬁve
years and drawing up to 350 participants a year. (In one of
my career iterations, I served as MassBik e’s executive

--- PAGE 76 ---
director for two years and got to watch Karin’s work up
close.) The Bike Festival, which raised tens of thousands of
dollars, served as Karin’s “sweat equity” on the board,
which requir ed members to either donate or raise money .
The event had a big impact on MassBik e’s bottom line, but it
had an even bigger one on K arin’s pr ofessional life.
Thanks in large part to her work on the Bike Festival, Karin
realized she loved event planning and fund-raising. On the
strength of her board experience, she was hired for a
development job at a local college and now, years later, has
her own fund-raising and event consulting business . Without
her boar d service, she says, it wouldn’t have been possible.
“When you have a day job, you have to color inside the
lines,” she says. “Ther e’s a general idea of how you’r e going
to do your job, and people have certain expectations. But
the freeing thing about being on a board is if you have an
idea, unless there’s some reason it’s horrible, they’ll say,
‘Great, run with it.’ You get to try out things you don’t in
your day job. You have more freedom to try things that are
riskier or may not work. And then you can take those skills
back to your day job. I always felt it was a real asset to
whatever I was doing Monday–F riday to have board stuﬀ I
had done in my back pock et.”
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 77 ---
Hitting the Campaign T rail
Volunteering and apprenticing aren’t just useful tools for
young professionals, however . Deborah Shah earned her
MBA in the late 1970s and spent three decades building a
successful, lucrative corporate career. “I didn’t have to
work,” she realized a few years ago. But she also didn’t
want to r etire. What should she do with her life?
She traveled to Rwanda, Haiti, and Cambodia to explor e
her interest in microﬁnance, but nothing stuck. All that
changed, however, when she heard a candi date for
gover nor speak and felt a connection. She’d always enjoyed
politics, but strictly as an observer : “I would typically watch
the morning shows on Sunday and read the morning paper . I
knew what was going on in the world, but not as an insider .”
She decided to get involved and showed up at
headquarters, wher e they gave her the most basic grunt
work: making phone calls to voters. But she earned trust
and greater responsibility because “I was the phone bank er
who showed up every day.” Eventually, the campaign asked
her to organize a senate district, then another,  and she
ﬁnally became regional ﬁeld director . She work ed on the
campaign for eleven months, unpaid, but in the process she
discover ed a passion: “I was inter ested in persuading people
to vote. I r eally lik ed campaigning.”
After the campaign ended, she learned somethin g else:
she’d made a name for herself . A state representative she’d
met on the trail was headed for a special election and
wanted her to run his campaign. When she helped him win,
other calls poured in. In the past ﬁve years, she’s headed
races for gover nor, state senate, and city council, plus a US
Senate campaign. “People have diﬀer ent phases in their
lives,” says Deborah. “The work I did for thirty years was
extremely meaningful and satisf ying, and so is this.”

--- PAGE 78 ---
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 79 ---
Job Shadowing
Apprenticing and volunteering are important short-ter m
ways to learn about interests and try out new ﬁelds . But you
may not even need that level of commitment. Occasionally,
a day is all it takes. One coach recalls a web designer client
who “liked design but couldn’t stand spending ﬁve days a
week in front of the comp uter.” Looking for a creative career
that had more interac tion with people, she became
interested in ﬂoral design  and read about it extensively . She
did ten informational interviews in the ﬁeld and, convinced
it was right for her, agreed to her coach’s suggestion to
shadow someone for a day .
“At the end of the morning,” the coach recalled, “she had
three questions: Is the room always cold? Is the ﬂoor always
cement? And are you always on your feet? And the guy said,
‘The room is always cold because we have to keep the
ﬂowers fresh, the ﬂoor is cement because I’m dropping wet
ﬂowers on it, and I’m always on my feet because we’re
moving around and delivering ﬂowers.’ And that was the
end of that.”
For those whose dream jobs aren’t located nearby, there’s
VocationV acations, a company founded in 2003 that allows
participants to test-drive over 125 new careers. Say you’d
like to be an alpaca rancher . If yes, and you don’t know any
personally, you can pay $849 and head oﬀ to Oregon for a
two-day apprenticeship with a real-life ranch mentor . If
you’d prefer to become a schooner captain, plunk down a
grand and (during the June–September sailing season) you
can join your mentor for one-on-one instruction roaming the
coast of R ockport, Maine.
If you want to make any kind of a professional leap, even
if it’s to something less esoteric, like becoming a freelance
writer, it’s essential to do your “personal and professional

--- PAGE 80 ---
due diligence,” says company founder Brian Kurth. “It’s
doing your homework and getting questions answ ered that
you didn’t know you needed to ask,” he says. “One question
I always have clients ask mentors is ‘What do you know now
that you didn’t know when you launched your business?’
The goal is for the clients not to make the same mistakes—
to hit the r oad faster, quick er.”
For clients who can’t take time oﬀ or aren’t yet ready to
spend a few thousand dollars on their adventur e, Kurth’s
company oﬀers phone and Skype mentorship at lower rates.
And sometimes the greatest beneﬁt of a VocationV acation is
simply its ability to reassur e others. Kurth recalls a recent
client who was “a very active photographer—he was so
skilled, he was actually a photography instructor .” He didn’t
need to learn any new camera techniques, but he did need
to convince his wife he wouldn’t ruin their nest egg by
moving into photography full-time. “His wife said, ‘It’s great
you want to start your own photography ﬁrm,’” Kurth
recalls. “‘And it’s not that I don’t trust you, but I want you to
better understand the business side.’ So she took the
VocationV acation with him.” As you reinvent yourself
professionally, sometime s the most important thing is
having your team behind you.
Try This
 
Make a list of dream companies or individuals you’d like
to work for. Now go on LinkedIn and see who you know
who works there or may be able to provide an
introduction.
Create a list of the value you could potentially provide.
Include a range—fr om stuﬀ anybody could do (making
phone calls to voters, pushing paper in the mailr oom) to

--- PAGE 81 ---
your unique talents (copy writing to improve their fund-
raising letters, programming to create a new app for
them).
Think about how the opportunity can best ﬁt into your
life. Can you take time oﬀ for a concerted internship?
Could you get a sense of what you need to know in only
a day or a few days? Or can you keep your professional
life steady but build new skills incrementally with a
board membership?
Put it on your calendar . In the next month, reach out to
your tar get or ganizations—ideally thr ough a contact, but
cold-calling if need be—with your proposal for how you
can help.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 82 ---
How Much Time and Money Can You
Spend?
If you have a lot of interests, it can be hard to know wher e
to begin to look for your own path-testing opportunities.
First, ask yourself how much time you’r e able to commit,
and how long you need to see if a given path is for you. My
friend Robbie arranged to take every Friday oﬀ from his
fund-raising job for several months, so he could devote the
time to expanding his nascent consulting practice. It was a
low-risk strategy that enabled him to test demand and
establish a foothold.
If you want to become an alpaca rancher, howev er, and
you currently  live in a metropolis, your free Fridays aren’t
going to help much. But spending time in the country—or, if
ﬁnances permit, a trip with VocationV acations—may give
you enough insight to see if you want to pursue it further . In
general, a few days are suﬃcient to eliminate possibilities,
but not enough to set a life’s course. So if you fall hard for
the alpacas on your ﬁrst date, make sure to take a couple
weeks’ vacat ion on a farm, or maybe even schedule several
months’ sabbatical, befor e buying a her d.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 83 ---
Dreaming Big
When you’r e deter mining the best place to get your
professional experience, however, don’t let your existing
contacts dictate your futur e. If you can turn up something
interesting, that’s great. But if not, don’t hesitate to dream
big and seek out your own opportunities. That’s what Joanne
Chang did when she wrote unsolicited letters to her culinary
idols (perhaps intrigued by her unusual backgr ound, every
single one of them  eventually wrote back). The truth is,
because so many people limit themselves, there’s often not
a lot of comp etition at the top. If there’s a senior executive
at your ﬁrm you really admire, reach out and see if he’ll
agree to be shadowed for a day. Unless you’r e writing to the
worldwide CEO, there’s probably little demand and he’ll be
ﬂatter ed.
Pluck will get you everywher e. A couple of years ago, I
met Kevin Roose, then still an under grad, who had already
published a book (The Unlik ely Disciple,  about his time
“under cover ” at conservative Liberty University,  learning
the ways of evangelicals) . Kevin, who went on to become a
New York Times  business reporter, had landed his big break
by interning for A. J. Jacobs, an editor at Esquir e magazine.
And how did he win this coveted position?
A. J. tells the story in his book The Year of Living Biblically
(his own religious experim ent, in which he tried to follow the
Bible literally): “Day 237. I got an unexpected email today . It
arrived in my in-bo x at 1:07 p.m. from a guy named Kevin
Roose. ‘Allow me to introduce myself . I’m an eighteen- year-
old native Ohioan in the middle of my ﬁrst year at Brown.’
Kevin went on to explain that he’s going to be working at a
café in New York this summer, but he wants to be a writer,
and he noticed I went to Brown as well, and . . . would I be
willing to tak e him on as a part-time personal inter n?”

--- PAGE 84 ---
The rest is clearly history . As Kevin’s experience proves,
it’s often easier to create your own opportunit ies. A. J.
Jacobs probably would have been inundated with résumés if
he’d posted an internship notice with Brown Career
Services, but Kevin, by asking for what he wanted in a
strategic and targeted fashion, was able to evade the
hordes.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 85 ---
The Path Isn’t Always Linear
Finally, you may have to tamp down your inner critic.
Sometimes ﬁnding the right career path can mean turning
your back on expensive training, like Karen Landolt’s law
degree, and sometimes it means a loss of security . Joanne
Chang recalls her parents’ reaction when she abandoned
management consulting: “Nowadays, there’s a glamorized
view of the food business. But in 1993, if there was a Food
Network, nobody was watching it. They said, ‘You’re giving
up a really stable, secur e, ﬁnancially lucrative career that’s
going to take care of you. It comes with health insurance,
vacations, a 401(k), cabs to take you home when you work
late. And restaurants have no health insurance, you’r e paid
hourly, and when you leave, no cab takes you home. Are
you sur e you want to do this?’”
Then there was the prestige question. “People were like,
‘Really? Is that what you’re going to do?’” recalls Chang.
“It’s essentially blue-collar work, and I was coming from a
backgr ound where most, if not all, of my peers were working
in nice, cushy white-collar jobs. It’s not that people
consider ed it a step down—but it doesn’t have a clear path.”
Getting the most from your experience means going into
it with an open mind and a sense of possibility . Sometimes
you’ll learn the most by applying your training (a senior
executive could do an operations analysis for her favorite
nonpr oﬁt), but other times, the best learning experience
may involve starting at the bottom. “I’ve never been
concer ned about what I’m doing as long as I’m feeling
useful,” says Deborah Shah. “Years ago, I’d go with my
daughter and we’d do ‘Adopt a Pet’ care, and you’d be
cleaning out cages. Who cares? You’re trying to help out.”
She credits her experience as an entrepreneur . “I was
always a person who was willing to do whatever it took,”

--- PAGE 86 ---
she says. “Running your own company, you’r e a jack of all
trades; you book your own travel. I’m not a snob about
work, and if what needs to happen now is we’re all going to
fold letters and stuﬀ them into envelopes, you do it.”
My mom took a similar approach when she decided—in
her early sixties—to beco me a barber, despite having a PhD
and a successful counsel ing career. “It was actually fun to
tell people I was going to barber school,” she says. “They’d
say, ‘Why are you doing that?’ and it would spark a great
conversation. I never felt embar rassed—I had the education
—but it was a way to connect with people.” She now cuts
hair for most of her friends, and me.
The secr et is r ealizing that sometimes the path isn’t linear .
Says Susan Leeds, a longtime investment bank er who
shifted into the energy eﬃciency ﬁeld, you have to “accept
the fact that sometimes you have to take one step back to
take three or four steps forwar d. It would be incorrect if I
said I made a lateral shift: I went backwar d. But because of
the beneﬁt of my years of professional experie nce in a
competitive ﬁeld, even though I went back, I was able to
move forwar d fast—to leapfr og forwar d.”
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 87 ---
REMEMBER:
    Start by evaluating how much time you can spend
on test-driving your path and whether you’ll need to
earn money while doing so. That will help you deter mine
the right way to proceed. If you only requir e a minimal
salary, you can try apprenticing full-time, as Joanne did.
If you need to continue with your current full-time job,
consider other ways to build your skills, like joining a
board or volunteering on the week ends.
    Job shadowing can be a powerful way to see what
someone’s professional life is like. Most leaders, unless
they’r e at the C-level, usually aren’t deluged with
requests. If you develop a thoughtful request that
explains why you’d like to learn from them in particular,
they may well say yes.
    Make it clear, when you’r e taking on an
apprenticeship or volunteer assignment, that you’re
willing to work hard. No one wants to take a chance on
someone who thinks they’r e too good for the dirty work.
    The juiciest volunteer  and internship opportun ities
often aren’t advertised, so identif y your own targets and
approach them.
    The path isn’t always linear . Don’t be discouraged if
you temporarily have to go backwar d in terms of salary
or prestige in order to prepare yourself for your next
career leap.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 88 ---
CHAPTER 5
Develop the Skills You Need
Apprenticing, volunteering, and job shadowing are all great
ways to immerse yoursel f as you investigate new ways to
advance or change your career. But there’s another crucial
strategy : leveraging your current job to cultivate the skills
you need for the futur e. In some cases, that means
expanding the contours  of your current job so that it
encompasses new challenges, and in others, it’s about
providing a secur e base that enables you to explor e new
outposts safely . In this chapter, you’ll lear n about:
 
Ensuring your job gr ows with you
Strategic moonlighting
When to go back to school
When not to go back to school
Targeted strategies to build your skills
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 89 ---
Ensure Your Job Grows with You
For nearly twenty years, Richar d work ed as a high-power ed
reporter, ﬁrst covering the oil industry, then electricity
deregulation, and eventually gover nment securities. An
economics major in college, he thrived on the tight
deadlines and arcane subject matter : “The type of reporting
I do is statist ics-based,” he says. “It’s made a big diﬀerence
that I understand the nitty-gritty of mark et relationships and
how they work.”
But after so long in the trenches, Richar d felt this once-
coveted position had become tiring. And that’s why, to
Richar d’s surprise, his job satisfaction and professional
success ﬂourished when he took on a new assignment three
years ago. “The company decided they wanted  lifestyle
coverage,” he says. “They were going to do food and wine,
and I said, ‘Can I start writing?’”
Richar d isn’t interested in tracking trendy ingredients or
celebrity chefs. As a seasoned business reporter, what he
cares about is “the economic and sociological perspective”
behind America’s culinary obsessions. His eyes light up
when he discusses one of his favorite pieces, a behind- the-
scenes look at the “com mand center ” of a major food
festival, wher e—for almost seventy -two consecutiv e hours—
restaurateurs dish out nearly a half-million servings of
gourmet dishes.
He still spends about 85 percent of his time reporting on
gover nment securities, but it’s the dash of culinary
coverage that inspir es him most. “All veteran journalists are
looking for ways to stimulate themselves by writing outside
their beat,” he says, and he’s convinced it makes him a
better writer . Covering securities, “I have to be so analytical,
I have to digest information so quickly, and there’s such a

--- PAGE 90 ---
rapid turnove r of stories. But with a food and wine story, I
can sit back and think about what language I’ll use. The
style is a lot diﬀer ent, so it makes me feel I’m using all parts
of my brain if I’m able to do both.”
His new beat has also given him an unexpected leg up in
covering securities. “The business sources like to chat with
me because they know I’m diﬀer ent than other reporters,”
he says. “It gets me more of an ‘in.’ They’ll say, ‘I have a
client coming into town; what do you recommend?’
Entertaining out-of-towners is a big thing, and I have some
level of authority, so it mak es them feel mor e conﬁdent.”
Richar d’s not looking to go into food writing full-time. His
bosses are encouraging, he says, but caution him to
“remember what your real job is.” And that’s ﬁne with him,
because he’s found a way to mix his interests and create a
fulﬁlling job. As we parted after a morning interview, I asked
what he was working on that day. “Two stories,” said
Richar d. “One’s about whether Europe’s economy is going
to blow up, and the other is about grilling on a budget.”
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 91 ---
Strategic Moonlighting
Richar d found a satisf ying way to expand the scope of his
day job, giving him a taste of variety and a chance to
develop new writing skills. Patricia Fripp, now a well-
regarded professional speak er, took a slightly diﬀerent path
when she moved to San Francisco from her native  England
in the 1970s “to ﬁnd fame and fortune.” Trained as a
hairdresser, Fripp soon discover ed she possessed special
skills; slowly and strategically, she leveraged them into a
new car eer.
Her ﬁrst skill was relentless hustle. “In those days, you
were selling the concept  of having your hair styled,” she
recalls. “It was more expensive than going to the
barbershop, so you were not just selling the idea of ‘I’m the
best hairstyli st’; you were selling the idea that you should
spend three times more on your haircut, but I managed to
get them in.” She cajoled customers to provide referrals,
and when business was slow, she’d call them up: “John, it’s
six weeks since your last haircut, and you’r e going to look
shabby .” She’d hit executive watering holes after work, and
ﬂirt and pass out busines s cards; instead of taking a lunch
hour, she’d ﬁt in extra clients who only had time to come
during their own lunch br eaks.
In short order, she’d deve loped a clientele of powerful Bay
Area profess ionals from major companies like Levi Strauss
and Wells Fargo, and eventually launched her own salon.
And she made good use of her time with them. “When I had
people sittin g in my chair, I’d say to people in the public
relations business, ‘If you had a small hairstyling salon, how
would you promote it?’ Or I’d ask what made you the best
salesperson in your company, or what did you do in your
company that prompted a big company to want to buy it?
I’d say to other stylists, ‘Why would you talk drivel when you

--- PAGE 92 ---
have the most interestin g people in your chair?’ You take
advantage of having interesting people in front of you who
know mor e than you in certain ar eas.”
Her second skill was her easy command of a room.
Patricia had begun doing hair product demonstrations.
When her executive clients discover ed her sideli ne, “they
said, ‘Go speak to my Rotary,’ or ‘I have a staﬀ meeting; do
you want to give a speech on customer service?’”
Eventually, as referrals built, her free talks became paid
ones. She was thirty -two years old when she realized she
might want to make speaking her career, but she was also
only two years into a ten-year lease for her salon: “I was
smart enough to realize that becoming a professional
speak er is a long-ter m goal; you don’t just quit your job. You
plan your divor ce; you don’t just leave.”
So she bided her time and reinvested her proﬁts: “I was
one of the ﬁrst people in the speaking business with fancy
press kits and demo videos, because I could put all the
money I was making by speaking back into the business,
because I had another business to support it.” She also
spared no expense honing her craft, hiring speech coaches,
and taking classes in comedy and screenwriting to hone her
storytelling abilities. She even hired a choreographer to
evaluate her physical movements and use of the stage.
(Recalls Patricia, “He said, ‘You use the width well, but now
you need to use the depth,’ and that was worth paying him
for.”)
In 1984, a little less than a decade after giving her ﬁrst
paid speeche s, Patricia sold her hairstyling business and
became a full-time speak er. “At that point, I’d built my
speaking career and had more than replaced my income
from the salon,” she says. “Ther e comes a point where you
need to focus 100 percent of your attention on what you’r e
doing. I wanted to focus on the ne xt area.”

--- PAGE 93 ---
Patricia lever aged her initial hairstyling career in several
crucial ways. F irst, she made connections with k ey corporate
executives—initially her clients for hair dressing, and later for
speaking. Second, she sharpened her communication skills,
ﬁrst by talking to audien ces about hair products, and later
moving on to business themes. And ﬁnally, she strategically
reinvested her salon proﬁts, enabling her to build up a
robust speaking car eer prior to going full-time.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 94 ---
When to Go Back to School
Richar d convinced his bosses to expand his beat into food
and wine. Patricia nurtur ed her day job, while steadily
growing her expertise. But what if the skills you need just
can’t be obtained by moonlighting or taking on new job
responsibilities? It may be time to go back to school for
additional training.
Heather Rothenber g knew she wanted to chan ge the
world. A sociology major, as one of her ﬁrst jobs out of
college, she ran a small nonpr oﬁt helping to revitalize an
economically depressed neighbor hood. “I became
fascinated by the link between transportation and people,”
she says, and decided she wanted to become a
transportation safety specialist—but she didn’t have any of
the necessar y training. She quickly realized she had to go
back to school. “To some  extent, I was a little oblivious to
the skepticism,” she recalls. “If I’m going to do something,
I’m going to ﬁnd a way to do it. There were peop le when I
started the program who said, ‘she’ll never make it.’”
Heather slogged through calculus, physics, and engineering
classes; those were all under graduate prerequisites  to make
up, befor e even starting her doctoral pr ogram.
Going back to school, especially in a technical program
wher e she had the least math and science backgr ound of
anyone, wasn’t easy, but humility was key. “I didn’t shy
away from taking on things I knew would be harder for me
than for other people,” says Heather . “When we were
working on group project s, I was willing to put in the extra
time, ask around for help on my own, read the extra books,
and do what I needed to do to hold up my end of the deal,
rather than passing it oﬀ. I was really willing to ask for help
and to acknowledge that I had diﬀer ent experiences. Maybe
I wasn ’t as familiar with the software, but if I could ﬁnd

--- PAGE 95 ---
someone who was willin g to spend an extra half-hour to
help, I wasn’t shy and really expressed appreciation.” When
she ﬁnished her doctor ate, Heather had comp eting job
oﬀers; today, she works in Washington, DC, at her dream
job as a transportation safety analyst.
Heather’s experience illustrates the best reason to head
back to graduate school, that is, when it’s essentially
mandatory . That’s the case if you want to move into a job
that requir es speciﬁc technical training (like transportation
engineering) or professional licensur e, such as becoming a
doctor or lawyer or acupuncturist. Another valid reason is
when you want to expand your skills and networks, and feel
ready to get the most out of the e xperience.
Alice Denison’s dream since childhood was to become a
painter . She grew up in Queens, close enough to witness the
ferment of the Manhattan art scene, but never to consider it
a real possib ility for herself . “I was raised to believ e art was
a hobb y,” she says. She studied it in college, but needed a
job and plunged into the work world after graduation. “A lot
of people in creative pursuits face a marginal existence,”
she says, “and I knew I’d be a nervous wreck if I didn’t have
health insurance.”
She became a nonpr oﬁt fund-raiser and over the next
ﬁfteen years work ed her way up to chief of staﬀ, eventually
following her boss into a prestigious job in state
gover nment. All the while, inspir ed by the working moms
around her, she pursued her art: “If they’r e getting up at all
hours to raise a child, I can ﬁnd the time to advance my
work.” She began rising befor e 5 a.m. to paint for three to
four hours befor e work, and realized how much happier it
made her. But she could also be hard on herself: “If I
overslept until 5:15 and got to the studio at 5:30, I felt like I
had failed. It was just crushing.”

--- PAGE 96 ---
During those  years, she applied twice to master of ﬁne
arts graduate programs and was turned down. But in 2005—
a full twenty -ﬁve years after ﬁnishing college with her art
degree—she tried again and got accepted to a part-time
program at the Fine Arts Work Center in Provincetown, the
Cape Cod, Massachusetts, art mecca. She was determined
to get the most out of it: “I was old enough to be very blunt
and fearless with the questions I’d ask. I think it really hit
me that getting my work to a place wher e I felt good about
it, having a chance to get it out there, gettin g to be
respected—that’s what success is to me.”
At times, as an executive very much outside the New York
art scene, she questioned whether her painting would be
taken seriously . But she reminded herself, “The starving
artist in the garret is a convention, and artists break
conventions all the time. Look at Wallace Stevens, who was
an insurance salesman. You can ﬁnd examples of people
who’ve done  bizar re things to feed themselves and keep the
lights on.”
But in her graduate program, Alice found someone who
did believe in her work. Years befor e, she’d met a prominent
Boston art professor when she’d taken classes with him.
They reconnected when he was a visiting artist in
Provincetown, and he loved her work. Says Alice, “He told
me, ‘If I can help, get in touch.’ And I said sure, but then he
came back into the room and said, ‘I mean it.’ If he hadn’t
come back into the room, I wouldn’t have done it.” But she
got up the courage to create a wish list of Boston  galleries
she’d like to represent her. With her professor’s help, Alice’s
ﬁrst choice said yes.
For Alice, who was comm itted to taking her skills to the
next level and needed to make more contacts in the art
world (which she couldn’t  do from within the conﬁnes of her
day job), going back to graduate school was the right

--- PAGE 97 ---
answer . But, even though it’s often mark eted as a
professional panacea, for many people it’s not.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 98 ---
When Not to Go Back to School
I often get inquiries fr om e xecutives looking for advice about
whether they should go to graduate school. They feel like
their career is stalled, and wonder if an MBA, a JD, a
doctorate in organizational psychology, or maybe a
journalism degree would give them that extra edge. It’s true
that top-tier programs can provide valuable netwo rking and
connections (and I wouldn’t advise anyone to turn down the
opportunity to attend Harvar d Business School or one of its
elite peers).
But unless we’re talking about the pinnacle of top schools,
my answer is generally no. As someone who has a great but
perfectly useless (in the professional world) degree in
theology, I have ﬁrsthand knowledge that a master’s degree
doesn’t win you extra points or gain you any additional
respect. It’s your demonstrated expertise—not your
academic cr edentials—that counts in the business world.
Unless you have  to go back to grad school, as in Heather’s
case, you should think carefully about your end goals,
especially when nearly $100,000 in debt is likely to be
involved. You may be interested in the subject and want to
expand your worldview . You may have a clear sense of
particular skills you want  to develop, as Alice did. You may
want to wait out a recession and learn something new,
which is better than moping around unemployed. But a lot
of graduate programs are simply a racket, preying on
people’s status concer ns and fears about the futur e. In
many cases, it’s simply not worth it.
You can often learn what you need and make conn ections
with professionals in your ﬁeld, rather than fellow newbie
students, through networking, volunteering, or other
inexpensive means. Given the massive cost involved, it’s
often better to rule out every other option ﬁrst and return to

--- PAGE 99 ---
grad school only when you’ve deter mined it’s the sole route
to meeting your personal objectives. Something as simple
as starting a blog can sometimes be a much more potent
demonstration to employers that you know what you’r e
doing.
Try This
 
What skills do you need to develop for your r ebranding?
Can you learn them on the job or through a side
ventur e, or do you need to r eturn to school?
Make a list of thr ee things you can do in the ne xt several
months to enhance your knowledge base (take an adult
education class, seek out a new assignment, connect
with knowle dgeable colleagues, create your own
resear ch pr oject, and so on).
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 100 ---
Do a “Mini-MBA ”
Dave Cutler decided to take a hybrid approach during his
recent job search. A husband and father, he knew he
couldn’t aﬀord to take a year or two oﬀ for full-time studies.
But because he wanted to land a position in social  media, a
new area for him, he decided to go all out demonstrating his
skills and simultaneously  pursue additional studi es. Dave
honed his personal blog to showcase his knowledge  of social
media. He developed a “Hire Dave Cutler ” website and
began actively using a variety of social channels. Finally, he
enter ed a weeklong “Mini-MBA ” program at R utgers.
“With things  you learn by doing, there are going to be
gaps in your knowledge,” says Dave. “I wanted to ﬁll in
those gaps and have more of a foundation in social media,
as well as something tangible to point to, because it’s hard
to call yourself a social media guy without some thing on
your résumé.” The program was ideal because it was taught
by knowledgeable, real-world practitioners, some of whom
Dave alr eady followed on T witter .
He left with practical tips (one professor suggested he
place a QR code on his résumé, which has increased his
“scan-thr ough” rate) and some valuable connections,
including a link to a guest lectur er who is the business
partner of the inﬂuential blogger Chris Brogan. Thanks to
the connection, Brogan took up the “Hire Dave Cutler ”
cause and has repeatedly plugged him on his weekly web
TV show . In general, says Dave, the mini-MBA course “isn’t a
substitute for work experience. But it says I’ve made a
concerted eﬀort to learn about and underst and this
business.”
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 101 ---
Targeted Strategies to Build Your
Skills
Depending on your goals , the best recipe may be targeted
classes that focus on a particular skill. Joel Gagne completed
all the courses for a master of arts in gover nment. But in the
midst of running a company, a couple of cross-country
moves, and a new baby, completing his master’s thesis just
didn’t seem that relevant. “I don’t want to say those classes
were worthless, because they weren’t,” he says. “Ther e
were one or two nuggets. But as far as directly aﬀecting my
professional life, graduate work has not had the type of
impact necessary or given me the business skill set I need.”
Instead, he’s made a point to continue his professional
development by taking targeted classes that address clear
business needs. “Let’s take writing,” he says. “I don’t need
the fundamentals. I need to be skilled at how to write a blog
post, or how to write a proposal—speciﬁc things  that will
impact my work. Tackling something small and more
focused has served me far better than completing that
master’s degr ee or anything I took fr om studying for it.”
He’s taken classes on goal setting, eﬀective business
writing, and how to sell your business. He took a noncr edit
class at the University of Chicago on creative writing, but
with an emphasis on business applications. “Almost no one
in the room was looking to write the next great novel,” he
recalls. “Ever yone said, ‘I’m in business, I need to be able to
write better; my work can’t sound clunk y or dry. I have to
captur e someone’s attention oﬀ the bat: how do I do that?’”
As you reinvent yoursel f professionally, you’ll need to
cultivate new skills. But you don’t necessarily need to pony
up for an expensive graduate degree. Think carefully about
your goals, and you may be able to obtain the experience

--- PAGE 102 ---
you need through volunteering (as we discussed in the last
chapter), expanding the parameters of your current job,
moonlighting, or taking targeted classes to expand your skill
set.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 103 ---
REMEMBER:
    You can often push the boundaries of your current
job in ways that allow you to explor e new avenues and
build new skills. Ask if there are relevant new
responsibilities you can tak e on.
    Going back to graduate school shouldn’t be your
default option. If it’s not mandatory for your chosen
ﬁeld, think hard about whether the debt and time out of
the workfor ce is worth it. The most prestigious schools
have powerful brand value and alumni networks  that
can turbochar ge your career, but that’s not the case for
most programs. Ask yourself if there are other, cheaper
ways you can obtain the knowledge you want.
    Create a concr ete list of skills and knowledge you
should develop. That’ll force you to think harder about
your education. If you need to be able to write better
reports, you can probably ﬁnd targeted help (such as a
class or a writing tutor), rather than jumping into a two-
year program that only tangentially touches on what
you want to lear n.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 104 ---
CHAPTER 6
Who’s Your Mentor?
At this point, you’ve identiﬁed your new path, tested it out,
and begun to develop the new skills you need to succeed.
But, regardless of your abilities, entering a new ﬁeld or
working your way up the corporate ladder can still be a
confusing, frustrating process. It helps to have an
experienced guide to help you navigate. But mentors, sadly,
are in short supply . While it would be great to have a sage
senior pr ofessional tap you out of the blue (“I r ecognize your
potential—let me help you achieve it!”), it’s probably not
going to happen. Though some people get lucky, for most of
us, mentors never materialize.
But that doesn’t mean you can’t still beneﬁt from their
wisdom. The secret that most people don’t realize is that
you have to seek them out, and they often come in
unexpected packages. In this chapter, we’ll cover the eight
steps of building successful mentor r elationships, including:
 
Discovering who you want to emulate
Ensuring they’r e a good ﬁt
Identif ying the right mentor for you
Learning fr om the wisdom of cr owds
Learning what your mentor, uniquely, can teach you
Developing your own cur riculum
Making it worthwhile for your mentor
Giving back

--- PAGE 105 ---
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 106 ---
Step 1: Discover Whom You Want to
Emulate
Years ago, Joel Gagne (the executive mentioned in chapter 5
who took targeted professional development classes) was
elected to the school committee in his hometown—the
youngest member in town history . That’s when he met
Steve, the owner of a public relations ﬁrm and a longtime
committee member thirty years his senior . “I was impressed
by Steve’s ability to take an emotional, comple x problem
and very eloquently break it down,” Joel says. “He could ask
questions and give an opinion that I might not agree with,
but he did it in a way that people could understan d. Having
that patience and maturit y, that was something I very much
lacked when I was twenty -six years old. He was a matur e,
respected professional. That’s what I saw in Steve that I
wanted people to see in me.”
Steve and Joel’s mentor relationship is classic—a n older
statesman helping a young protégé. But think broadly : don’t
assume your mentors have to be older, or in the same
industry . You can sometimes learn the most from
unexpected sources. Hank Phillippi Ryan is an Emmy Award–
winning TV reporter in Boston, famous for righting wrongs
with her “Hank Investigates” segments. But after decades in
the news business, she found herself inspir ed to take a new
path by, of all people, her inter n.
“Ther e was a wonderful young woman who work ed at my
station,” she recalls. The intern dreamed of returning to
Boston to become Hank’s full-time producer, and after a few
years paying her dues in other TV mark ets, a job eventually
opened up. “She was about twenty -seven and had written a
book,” says Hank. “She was really a kid. She was writing a
romance novel and asked me to edit it, so I did, with much

--- PAGE 107 ---
delight. I was immersed in my oﬀ hours editing her novel
and it was percolating in my head: if she can write a book, I
can write a book . It’s a Zen thing: when the student is
ready, the teacher will appear .”
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 108 ---
Step 2: Ensure Mentors Are a Good
Fit
Not everyone  will be a great mentor, so it’s important to
learn as much as you can about that person befor e pursuing
or investing in a mentor relationship. David is a medical
school professor and heads the emer gency department at a
prestigious hospital. Medicine is a ﬁeld theor etica lly based
on learning over time from more senior doctors. But the
process doesn’t always go smoothly . “I’ve somet imes had
people coming to me after they’ve struck out with someone
who would more naturally be their mentor,” he says,
“because that mentor was focused on what he or she
thought the trainee should be doing and didn’t tak e the time
to ﬁgure out what they actually wanted out of their career.
Good mentors should listen to what a mentee is saying and
help them ﬁgure out what they want for themselves, rather
than having a set idea and pushing them to actualize that
plan.”
At David’s rareﬁed institution, there’s an emphasis on
going into academia or public policy; if the newly minted
doctors realize they’r e not interested in that path, the
pressur e can be enormous. “I try to start the conversation
with a gentle statement: you’ve spent your whole life trying
to please other people, your parents, then your college
professors and your medical school professors. Now you
don’t have to answer to anyone’s dream. It’s about your
own dream, and once we ﬁgure it out, I’ll help you achieve
that. They feel much more relaxed after that conversation;
they don’t feel lik e they’r e letting somebody down.”
Another prospective mentor warning sign is an inability to
make time for the mentee. Says David:

--- PAGE 109 ---
One of the ﬂaws I see in some folks who consider
themselves mentors is they’r e too busy, or they give the
appearance of being too busy. If a resident or junior
faculty member asks to see me and I don’t make them
feel like it’s something I want to do, it’s hard for them to
ask again. So I try to make it one of my highest
priorities. It’s not that I’m not busy—but succe ssful
mentors make you feel it’s something they’r e eager to
do, rather than a favor you’r e doing for the person.
There’s always something else you can do with your
time, something that will ﬁll up your CV rather than
talking with someone about a potential job or a tough
case last week that’s making them upset. But if you’r e
available over time to talk with people, you build up a
relationship that can be r eally r ewar ding.
So follow David’s advice: make sure your prospective
mentor is willing to make time for you and has your
interests (not their own agenda) at heart.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 110 ---
Step 3: Identify the Right Mentor for
You
Joel and Steve built their mentor relationship through shared
work on the school comm ittee. But what if a good mentor
relationship just isn’t happening for you organically?
Sometimes you may have to take a more deliberate
approach.
Roxy Kriete recently retired after a successful career in
nonpr oﬁt management. But she began as an elementary
school Englis h teacher at a small private school. “We had
zero money, and the classr ooms were overcrowded,” she
recalls. “A tiny house came up for sale next to the school
and everyone wanted to buy it, but there was no money .”
She’d helped  out in admissions for the school, though, and
knew one family that she thought might have the resour ces
to help.
So on a Friday, as the staﬀ was sitting around
brainstor ming about how to ﬁnd 120 small-tick et donors,
she had a brainstor m: “I said, ‘What if I could go get it from
one person by Monday?’ They said ‘Ha, ha,’ and bet me a
six-pack of Sam Adams that I couldn’t. I called the family up
and talked to them. It turned out the guy was the grandson
of people who had founded some big steel company in
Pittsbur gh. They had a huge amount of family money and
they were grateful to the school, so I got it. The school
made me a half-time development director, and now I had
to ﬁgur e out how to do the job.”
She didn’t know anyone she could turn to for advice, so
she started attending meetings for a group called Women in
Development. When she found out they had a mentor
program, she immediately signed up and was paired with
Sally, a longtime fund-raiser for a premier liberal arts

--- PAGE 111 ---
college—an experience that was “lifesaving” for navigating
her new job.
But, sometim es, a formal mentorship program doesn’t
seem right or isn’t available. If you have a casual
relationship with someone who seems as if she could be a
good mentor, executive coach Michael Melcher suggests
that “it can be a very powerful thing to tell some body you
want them to be your mentor,” as long as you explain what
you mean (so they can deter mine whether it makes sense
for them).
Melcher recalls, “I did this ballsy thing once that I’m really
proud of: I know this move r-and-shak er guy, and I work ed on
a project with him eight or nine years ago. He’s a captain of
industry, but I think he sees me as a diﬀer ent, youthful
version of himself . I said, ‘Dick, I’m going to ask you a
question: I want you to be my mentor, and what that means
is every six months we’ll meet for breakfast and you give
me advice.’ And he said, ‘Of course.’ The key is I asked and I
explained  what the r ole should be.”
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 112 ---
Step 4: Learn from the Wisdom of
Crowds
At times, of course, there may not be one perfect person to
be your mentor . Instead, you can focus on creating  a broad-
based “personal board of directors,” with members who
have diﬀer ent skill sets and are willing to advise you in
smaller, more discrete ways. (Napoleon Hill popu larized a
variation of the concep t in Think and Grow Rich as
“Master mind Groups.”) When she ﬁrst started her business,
executive coach Alisa Cohn participated in a group that
called themselves the “Buzz Club” because they’d promote
each other and ensur e accountability . “We were all women
entrepreneurs around the same age, and we met for coﬀee
monthly,” she recalls. “I could bring anything to them and
bounce it oﬀ them. They can be better strategic think ers
about you because they can show you a portrait of
yourself .”
In putting together your group, don’t just tap the people
who know you best, says Cohn. “It’s about who you think
would have the most insight—people you instinctively trust.
It’s nice to have old friends and colleagues, but it can be
equally helpful to have new people on your team because
they see you now, and aren’t hinder ed by baggag e of you
from ﬁfteen years ago.” A fellow member ran a networking
group, Cohn recalls, “and  at the time, I was nervous about
public speaking. She said, ‘You’re on the calendar . It’s May
23, and here’s what you’r e going to talk about.’ I was so
terriﬁed, but I’d never have started unless I was bossed into
it.”
Heather, the transportation engineer, didn’t set out
looking for a group of mentors. But when, in her ﬁrst year of
graduate school, her entire department headed to
Washington, DC, for their industry’s annual confer ence, she

--- PAGE 113 ---
stumbled into one. “I decided to go to the Women’s Issues
in Transportation Committee meeting,” she recalls . New to
the ﬁeld and coming from a nonengineering background,
she “felt lost” and thought a group of female professionals
might understand. Intending just to observe, she was
quickly recruited: “By the end of the meeting, they had
asked me to plan a session at the next annual meeting. I
thought, it’s ridiculous!  I don’t even know what’s important;
I don’t know how to ﬁnd the speak ers. But I’m up for a
challenge.”
Over the course of the next year, she stayed in close
touch with the committee, about twenty women, many of
them in high-ranking positions. Her confer ence session was
a success, and she stayed  involved in the group, eventually
becoming secretary . A decade after her fateful ﬁrst meeting,
she’s now the group’s chair. “They’r e my core group of
mentors,” says Heather . She’d turn to group members for
technical, job-related advice and professional development
questions, and they actively encouraged her to seek them
out.
When Heathe r was seeking her ﬁrst job out of graduate
school, she applied to an organization one group member
work ed for. “I hadn’t said anything to her at ﬁrst,” Heather
recalls, “because I didn’t want to put her in an awkwar d
position. I didn’t know what was appropriate in terms of
asking for her support. So someone came to her when they
got my application, and she e-mailed me immediately . She
said, ‘I can’t believe you didn’t tell me! I would have been
happy to go to bat for you, and I did. But don’t ever do that
again .’” When you’ve got mentors, Heather quickly learned,
they want you to tap them.
Finally, the structur e of a group (whether it’s a networking
group like Alisa’s or a professional organization like
Heather’s) can be helpful. But it’s not always necessary to
get the help you want.  My girlfriend has a suave and

--- PAGE 114 ---
sophisticated friend who used to manage an art gallery, but
whose passio n wasn’t on the business side: she wanted to
paint. So, leveraging the connections she’d made, she
reached out to her friends (some of New York’s most
acclaimed artists) for free painting lessons and studio visits.
Even though they weren’t an organized group, she was able
to elicit knowledge from each of them and draw on their
unique expertise. It was a top-notch education, and the
artists, whom she’d befriended years befor e, were glad to
help, especia lly since she was able to give back a steady
stream of business advice and art world intelligence. The
private tutorials helped her make rapid progress, and today
she has an international art career and is represented by a
gallery in the Netherlands.
Try This
 
Make a list of a half-dozen people in your life you admire
—and identif y why. (Mary is great at closing sales, Ted
knows how to navigate  oﬃce politics better than
anyone, Dinesh has ﬁgured out how to build
relationships with the media, and so on.)
For each, decide if you’ll pursue an “organic” or
“strategic” mentorship approach. If you work with them
or see them regularly, you may be able to naturally
deepen the relationship by asking for targeted advice or
feedback. If you don’t see them often, you may want to
reach out with a speciﬁc request: “I really respect  your
opinion. W ould you be willing to meet a few times a year
and give me advice?”
Think about what you can give back. Mento rship
shouldn’t be a one-way street. In addition to your
gratitude, how can you help them? Can you boost them

--- PAGE 115 ---
on social media by commenting on their blogs or
retweeting their posts regularly? If their ﬁrms are
looking for good job candidates, can you steer pr omising
prospects their way? Can you keep them apprised about
industry trends that may be less visible to someone
higher up the ladder? Focus on what their needs are and
work har d to ﬁnd a way to meet them.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 116 ---
Step 5: Learn What Your Mentor Can
Teach You
“Deﬁnitely the ﬁrst month working for him, I never thought
he’d be my mentor because he was such a pain in the
neck.” That’s how Johnna Marcus, a young professional now
training to be a speech therapist, recalls meeting Matt, who
was the general manager at the large bookstor e chain
wher e she work ed af ter graduating into the Gr eat R ecession.
“He was a complete 180 from any manager I’ve ever had,”
she says. “He was very particular, very organized, precise,
meticulous about things—he was diﬃcult to get accustomed
to. You either had to adapt or you were going to leave
because you were never going to be at peace there. It was a
shock to me.”
She was a hard work er and had gotten along well with
previous bosses, but reporting to Matt was a challenge: “I
really went through times  when I thought I couldn’t do it.”
But she needed a job, and there were few alternatives; it
had taken her months to land this position. So she slowly
began to adapt to Matt’s hard-cor e style. It wasn’t easy, and
sometimes she wasn’t even sur e wher e to begin. She’d have
a three-page list of “to -dos” that seemed insur mountable.
But Matt was willing to help. “I have a hard time
organizing things into concise points,” says Johnna, “but
that’s what he taught me—‘L et’s bring it down to three
basic ideas, three fundamental things you need to get done
by this time,’ and that made it easier to compr ehend. He
knew, too; he knew when I was getting nervous, and my
mind would be going on all the things I needed to do, and
he’d pick up on that and say, ‘Let’s take a deep breath and
see what we’r e going to do ﬁrst.’ ”

--- PAGE 117 ---
His focus on clarity and organization made an impact on
Johnna. “It’s about organizing everything so that when
someone comes up to you and asks you wher e a sheet is
from six months ago, you don’t hesitate. You know wher e it
is,” she says. She also learned from his ability to adapt to
what his employees really needed. “He didn’t want anyone
to come into his oﬃce and talk about things not related to
eﬃciency,” she recalls. “But I was in his oﬃce one time
when I said, ‘I’m telling you now I’m really overwhelmed.’
He knew the way he needed to be at that point, he adapted,
and we talked it out. He wasn’t going to be [emotionally
sensitive] 90 percent of the time, but the 10 percent when
he needed to be, he was.”
In the management jobs Johnna has held since meeting
Matt, his inﬂuence is still there. “It really did sink in,” she
says. “I realize after all that time how much of an eﬀect it
had; his philosophies mer ge into yours.”
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 118 ---
Step 6: Develop Your Own Curriculum
When Roxy, the teacher -turned-fund-raiser, returned to her
Women in Development group, she was astonished: “I was
so excited about my mentor and I was stunned to realize I
was in a minority . At least within my hearing range,
everyone else was grum bling that it was terrible. No one
had a good thing to say about it. I realized then that the
relationship requir es a lot of eﬀort from the mentee. It’s all
about what you mak e it, ways to tak e hold and maximize it.”
So how did she get the most out of her mentorship
experience with Sally? First, she ensur ed their contact was
frequent, with scheduled monthly breakfast meetings. (If
you wait too long befor e contacting your mentor, the
relationship may cool.) Second, and most importan tly, Roxy
prepared for her meetings assiduously : “I invented my own
syllabus, and she was terriﬁc at delivering these
extemporaneous lectur es. I’d say, ‘Tell me about this, tell
me about that.’ The other thing I did was ask her to critique
my work frequently . I’d bring her something, my plan for
capital campaign materials or a draft annual fund-raising
letter . I’d say, ‘Ar e you willing to critique this? Go at it.’”
Joel would also turn to Steve with speciﬁc question s: “A lot
of it was how to deal with critics, how to deal with people
who’d challe nge you personally, and how to communicate
with an audience,” he recalls. “I would come to him and say,
‘Steve, I’m struggling on how to get my message across
here,’ and he’d help me navigate. He’d ask me questions
like, ‘What do you think they want? What do you have in
common? What do they want to hear? How can you connect
to them without giving up your position?’ It was amazing
advice about how to communicate with people.”
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 119 ---
Step 7: Make It Worthwhile for Your
Mentor
Why do people mentor? If done right, the relationships can
be tremendously rewar ding. “It’s some of the most
enjoyable and important work I do; it’s career-aﬃrming for
me,” says David, the emer gency department head. “I get
the pleasure of watching  people come in and learn to be
terriﬁc doctors and develop goals and dreams, and then
actualize them. It’s wonderful to watch. In a way it’s like
raising childr en, because some go on to be leaders for a
whole other generation of leaders or medical students, so
you can feel your eﬀorts bearing fruit generations down.”
That was certainly the case for Ben and me. When I met
Ben, he was a nineteen- year-old college student who
volunteer ed for the summer on the presidential campaign
wher e I was working, and I snagged him for the press oﬃce.
He was smart and willing to take on hard tasks like early
morning “clip duty,” scouring the news for relevant items to
circulate to senior campaign staﬀers, and a willingness to
drive endlessly to remote parts of New Hampshir e to work
events. Part of a mento r relationship (let’s be honest) is
about egotism, and I saw a lot of myself in Ben, from an
obsession with The New Yorker to a concer n for animal
welfar e. I also saw some of my ﬂaws, such as a propensity
towar d too-emphatic opinions, and wanted to shield him
from their consequences until he had more time to master
the nuances of wher e and how to e xpress them.
After the summer, he planned to leave the campaign, but I
devised a scheme for a new position and lobbied the state
director—quite hard—to hire Ben and give him a small
salary . He became our “track er,” following our opponents
and recording their every remark in order to play them back
and search for mistak es. (Trackers became quite famous in

--- PAGE 120 ---
2006 when former Virginia Senator Geor ge Allen, then
consider ed a top-rung presidential contender, insulted a
track er with what appear ed to be a racial epithet, thereby
destr oying his chances.)
I consider ed it my mission  to keep Ben out of harm’s way,
warning him sternly again st underage drinking and keeping
him out of the line of ﬁre from my prickly boss. After the
campaign ended, he leveraged his campaign experience
into a series of public relations and mark eting internships
and, after graduation, an analyst job tracking cong ressional
activity . After a couple years glued to C-SPAN, however, he
decided the Beltway life wasn’t for him and he was
accepted to a prestigious teacher -training program. My
professional utility to him is now limited, because he’s
teaching middle school special education, and I’m perhaps
the last person you want to consult when it comes to the
antics of preteenagers. But even though our mentorship has
ended, I feel luck y to be his friend.
This transition to a peer-level relationship can be one of
the best parts of mentorship. David recounts with delight
the frequent trips he makes to hospitals across the country,
doing Grand Rounds with his former students and
collaborating on resear ch. Joel, after honing his political and
public relatio ns skills by working for others for a decade,
partner ed professionally with Steve several years ago and
eventually pur chased his ﬁr m.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 121 ---
Step 8: Give Back
First, it starts with a simple thank you. “People
under estimate the importance of that,” says Roxy. “It’s
probably because they’r e humble— what are my words to
someone else? But when I’m on the other end, mentoring
someone, I wonder sometimes if they’r e getting anything
out of it. I don’t need  to hear a thank you, but it sure feels
nice. So when people mentor me, I try to give speciﬁc verbal
acknowledgment, letting them know how what they said
made a diﬀer ence in what I was doing. Occasionally I’d give
them a book or a jour nal, but lar gely it’s just saying thanks.”
Second, share your perspective. Michael Melcher, who
befriended Dick, the power lawyer, realized he also had
something to give in the relationship: “It’s something to
remember when dealing with older people,” he says. “They
like to share advice, but they’r e also very interested in what
younger people ar e doing and how they view the world.”
Finally, stay in touch and help wher e you can. Johnna
wrote a recommendation for Matt on LinkedIn, a useful
gestur e beca use, like Johnna, he lost his job when their
bookstor e chain folded. Over time, you may be able to steer
useful contacts or leads towar d your mentor, and he or she
will be grateful for your loyalty .
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 122 ---
REMEMBER:
    Think about the skills you’d like to develop and the
person you’d  like to beco me. Who in your life embodies
that? W ould she be open to advising you?
    Look for a mentor who’s focused on helping you
achieve your goals, not pushing his own agenda. And be
sure he’s willing to make time for you. You don’t want a
mentor who makes you feel as if you’r e imposing on his
time.
    Recognize that you may not end up with a single
mentor who imparts all the necessary wisdom to you.
Instead, you may need to think broadly about a group of
people you can tap for diﬀer ent kinds of advice.
    Sometime s a great mentor may come in an unusual
package—a younger colleague, a querulous boss.  Keep
an open mind and lear n what she has to teach you.
    You have  to take an active role in shaping your
mentorship experience. Don’t expect wisdom to simply
be deliver ed from on high; you have to think about  what
you want to lear n and ask good questions.
    Be thankful and make yourself useful. Not sure what
you can give back to your mentor? Think harder. It could
be assistance on a project, advising her kids about
colleges, boosting his proﬁle on social media, or helping
out with grunt work—whatever would help the most.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 123 ---
CHAPTER 7
Leverage Your Points of Diﬀerence
Thanks to your detailed investigation, your burnished skills,
and the advice of your mentors, you’r e beginning to develop
a good sense of how you can move forwar d successfully into
your new position or ﬁeld. But your work isn’t done. You’ve
conquer ed the substance: identif ying wher e you want to go
and cultivating the chops  necessary to get there. But that
won’t do you much good if the rest of the world can’t see it.
Now it’s time to focus on rebranding yourself publicly so
others recognize the new you and what you bring to the
table. The ﬁrst step is to understand what’s unique about
you, so you can convey that memorably to others.
In political campaigns (in addition to my corporate work,
I’ve advised on presidential, guber natorial, and US Senate
bids), one of the ﬁrst things you realize is that voters aren’t
going to take the time to evaluate all the ways you’r e
exactly like your opponent: they’r e busy people and, quite
rationally, they just want to know what the diﬀer ence is.
Some people would call this “dumbing down,” but
messaging specialists believe it’s a positive process,
because it forces (often long-winded) candidates to focus.
Boiling things down and explaining why you’r e a compelling
alternative is a powerful way to realize what’s most
important about you. In this chapter, you’ll learn strategies
for identif ying and leveraging your points of diﬀer ence,
including:

--- PAGE 124 ---
 
Building on your transferable skills
Understanding what you have and they don’t
Using the power of your identity
Starting with the basics: your appearance as a brand
The perils of “ﬁxing” your brand
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 125 ---
Building on Your Transferable Skills
One of the key questions to ask yourself as you plot your
reinvention is “What skills  or experiences do I have that can
be translated  into my new role?” That was certainly the
question Craig Della Penna faced when he learned his
dream job was being  eliminated. A longtim e train
enthusiast, Craig had been hook ed on rail trails—railr oad
lines converted into bike paths—in the early 1990s and
eventually wrote four books on the subject. When he was
oﬀered a job as a full-time rail trail advocate, it was a
“pinch-me job,” he r ecalls.
“It was more than walking the halls at the State House,”
he says. “It was getting to the ground level and teaching
locals to move these projects ahead, to stop the antis . . .
You have to travel to all these places; I was doing 900 miles
a week. I’d think nothing of driving 150 miles for a public
meeting to be there at 7 p.m.” But when his organization
announced it would be closing Craig’s regional ﬁeld oﬃce,
he had to ﬁnd another plan—fast. But if your unique skill is
that you’r e an expert in New England rail trails, who would
possibly hir e you?
That’s when Craig realized his special knowledge  could
actually serve him in many ﬁelds. Fulﬁlling a long-standing
dream, he and his wife bought a small bed-and-br eakfast in
the quaint town of Northampton, Massachusetts, literally
just feet from a rail trail. Mark eting it as the “Sugar Maple
Trailside Inn,” he caters to like-minded visitors, loaning out
cruiser bikes to guests and showcasing “one of the region’s
largest collec tions of antique railroad maps, docum ents, and
books on the history of railr oads in the Northeast.”
As his clientele grew, Craig noticed something important.
“Ther e were a lot of guests looking to relocate here,” he

--- PAGE 126 ---
says. “They’d  stay here and then go oﬀ with a realtor and
look at purchasing a house. I thought if I became the realtor,
they wouldn’t leave and I’d have a more complete
mark eting circle—the B&B would lead to me real estate
clients.”
His suspicions were correct. Real estate license in hand,
Craig went to work for a local ﬁrm and had a ready client
base from the get-go: “I have ﬁve or six transac tions per
year from people who start oﬀ as B&B guests, and that
allowed me to be an easy, laid-back realtor rather than a
driven, shark-edged realtor .” It also meant he had time to
pursue the advocacy that was still his passion. “I was able
to do more rail trail advocacy work after I left [the nonpr oﬁt
job] than when I was working for them,” he says.
He initially focused his real estate practice on selling
homes near rail trails, so he could share his love of biking,
leverage his extensive knowledge, and implant more
advocates in local communities, an important consideration
because some residents still resisted the idea of rail trails
and consider ed them disruptive or crime-ridden. “Several
antis told me they’d never be able to sell their house [near a
rail trail], and I became  a realtor specializing in that to
tweak them,” he says, laughing.
In 2010, Craig opened his own real estate oﬃce in
Northampton, a franchise of a ﬁrm based in Boulder,
Colorado, called Pedal to Properties, which does real estate
showings by bike. “We’ll tour the house, see if it’s safe for
kids to bike to school, check out the sights and sounds of
the neighbor hood,” he says. Biking and rail trails are a
critical part of the brand: at his request, the city removed a
parking space in front of his oﬃce and he installed a
fourteen-bik e corral. He gives out loaner bikes to clients and
to guests at local hotels , and he oﬀers weekly bike tours
showing oﬀ the local rail trail network. “They’ll never put on

--- PAGE 127 ---
my graveston e that I sold houses,” Craig says. “I’m like the
Johnny Appleseed of rail trail conversion.”
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 128 ---
From Legal Scholar to Wine Expert
Craig turned his unique knowledge about rail trails into a
new career as a B&B proprietor and realtor . Lisa Granik, on
the other hand, initially feared she’d have to throw away her
hard-fought legal training as she consider ed a new dir ection.
An aspiring law professor , she’d done all the right things—
Fulbright resear ch in the former Soviet Union, a doctorate
from Yale Law School, and a hefty dissertation tracking the
comparative history of sexual harassment litigation in
Russia and the United States. But as she got closer to her
goal, there were ominous  signs. “I had several friends who
were legal academics, and all of them were clearly
unhappy,” she r ecalls. “I thought, is this my futur e?”
She began diving into an amateur interest of hers—wine—
and taking classes. And soon, she made a surprising
discovery : her training as a legal scholar was the perfect
backgr ound to launch a new career in the wine industry .
First, like most academics, she’d had language training in
order to be able to resear ch primary sources. Fluent in
Russian, Spanish, and French, with a little Italian thrown in,
Lisa found herself uniquely positioned to communicate
directly with winegr owers, many of whom are farmers who
don’t speak English. Second, she realized her ability to
evaluate the taste of wine was shaped by her legal
education. “Wine analysis is deductive,” she says, “and
that’s a skill set one develops as a lawyer . It’s the ability to
break a wine down with deductive r easoning.”
Third, her training in oral arguments meant she had an
edge in communicating about wine: “The ability to take a
comple x problem and explain it to someone who’s not an
expert, that’s a very useful skill that many people don’t
have.” Finally , in a somewhat comic turn of events, she was
even able to leverage her experience writing a dissertation.

--- PAGE 129 ---
It turns out that to beco me a Master of Wine, a rigorous
industry designation, you have to study for years, take a
battery of tests, and, yes, write a dissertation about wine.
Using the resear ch skills  she’d picked up on the ﬁrst go-
round, she was able to polish oﬀ her second one more
quickly . Today, Lisa is actually the North American
dissertation coor dinator for the Institute of Masters of W ine.
On the surface, legal academia and the wine business
have little in common. But as Lisa’s story shows, sometimes
the most salient job requir ements are hidden below the
surface and ar e eminently transferable.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 130 ---
Understand What You Have—That
They Don’t
Another important question you can ask is what skills or
abilities you possess that are in short supply in your new
ﬁeld. Susan Leeds was a Wharton MBA who had work ed for
more than ﬁfteen years as an investment bank er: “credit
products, ﬁxed-income security, municipal bonds,” she’d
done it all. After taking several years oﬀ with her kids, she
was looking for a new direction. “I didn’t want to go back
and do what I did befor e,” she says. “If I’m going to go back
to work and not be with my kids, I’m going to do something
I care about—something that motivates me and feels like
I’m making a diﬀer ence.”
As a new mother, she had developed an interest in
envir onmental issues: “I started thinking about what’s
happening in the world, and what kind of a world our
childr en ar e going to gr ow up in.” Casually tooling ar ound on
the website of an envir onmental advocacy group, she
stumbled onto a job listing: astonishingly, they were looking
for someone with an investment banking backgr ound. Soon,
Susan was on the job with a two -year policy fellowship.
It was an immediate cultur e shock. She’d never worked at
a nonproﬁt, never done policy resear ch, and had taken a
massive pay cut. “I was a terrible ﬁsh out of water at that
place,” she recalls. “There were four hundr ed employees
and only two MBAs—one  in accounting and the other was
me.” She wasn’t always r eceived positively : “I was a suspect
person. I’m in a world of hard-cor e envir onmental advocates
and I was from the business world; there were plenty of
people in the envir onmental advocacy ﬁeld who view people
like me as the enemy . I was learning to speak a diﬀer ent
language and getting frustrated because people didn’t

--- PAGE 131 ---
understand what I was saying or didn’t care about my
opinion.”
Deter mined to succeed at her fellowship, she muscled
through: “I focused on the positive aspects as much as I
could, that this role was giving me the opportunity to meet
and network with a huge number of people, some of them
senior level, that I otherwise would have never had access
to. And I also focused on the fact that I cared about the
work.”
But amid the lawyers, policy wonks, and scientists, she
realized she had a specia l skill: “They wanted someone who
could talk to people on Wall Street, and I could do that.” She
also saw important connections to her old job. “One of the
big opportunities was making buildings more energy
eﬃcient,” she says. “You invest in them and all of a sudden,
it looks a lot like real estate ﬁnance and asset ﬁnance, and
that’s what I know how to do. Most of the policy work that
looked at how to increase investment in energy eﬃciency
was being done by traditionalists, and they weren’t looking
at it as investments. It was about forcing people  to do it,
rather than a mark et-bas ed perspective. You can make an
investment associated with a positive return—that became
my mantra, that you have to look at things diﬀer ently.”
She began to develop a reputation as an innovative
think er in the ﬁeld. Befor e her fellowship was up, she had
become a coveted speak er at major confer ences and
multiple ﬁrms had headhunted her. Today, she runs a public-
private partnership dedicated to spurring energy eﬃciency
investments. “It’s a huge  learning experience. I knew a lot
about ﬁnancial mark ets, but it’s also now about
gover nment, policy, energy, utilities, regulation, and even
the real estate industry,” she says. “People look to me for
policy leader ship in this ﬁeld, and that’s a diﬀer ent thing
than I would have done in a million years on W all Str eet.”

--- PAGE 132 ---
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 133 ---
Leverage Y our Outsider Status
Susan’s ﬁnance skills, while top-notch, weren’t unusual on
Wall Street. But she made herself valuable because in the
envir onmental advocacy world, very few people knew what
she did. Her skills became a precious commodity that
distinguished her and helped her rise quickly . In a similar
fashion, Jason Shaplen leveraged his unique position as a
newcomer in various ﬁelds. Most professions judge you on
your experience—in that profession. But Jason knew he
could never win that game.
The real question was, how do you take an eclectic
résumé (he had work ed as a journalist, a management
consultant, diplomatic negotiator, presidential campaign
speechwriter, Asian telecom executive, and nonpr oﬁt
executive) and turn it into a strength, rather  than a
weakness? His answer was to simultaneously allay concer ns
about his competence, while intriguing others with his
outsider perspective.
“I’ve worked in so many ﬁelds, I can speak the language
of almost any of them,” he says. “I can talk to the hedge
fund guy in his language, or I can go to the gover nor’s oﬃce
and talk in his language about moving things through the
legislatur e. As I meet new people, in part because I can talk
a little bit of their language, they start being interested in
you: He talks like a diplomat, but not a standar d diplomat—
maybe he can help us think about things diﬀer ently . I guess
I give people conﬁdence that I know enough about their
ﬁeld, yet I can bring something new and interesting to the
table.”
He worked hard to learn the nuances of his new
professions. “It was total immersion,” he says. “I ran like
hell for the library .” But he also embraced his outsider role,
which he knew gave him the freedom to suggest new ideas

--- PAGE 134 ---
and approaches. “I try to keep myself out of the minutiae, to
make sure there’s enough distance so I have some
perspective,” he says. “You have to know how to do the
mechanics, but you also want to think about it in a new way.
So you actually try not to become an expert in the ﬁeld. You
want to be something in between: halfway between being
an expert and being a total novice. It’s knowing enough to
know what’s going to make a diﬀer ence and be helpful, but
you’r e still able to think outside the bo x.”
He’s used that technique  in his current role as executive
director of a homelessnes s prevention agency . Even though
he’s now work ed in the ﬁeld for nearly a deca de—long
enough to amass a great deal of expertise—he still tries to
maintain an outsider’s perspective, looking for innovations
from other industries. “We’ve created a fantastic new model
for how to serve homeless childr en,” he says, “and that’s
because I go look at how things are done in early childhood
education programs, child guidance centers, center s helping
kids in crisis, and that’s typically not done in our ﬁeld.”
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 135 ---
Use the Power of Your Identity
Above and beyond your skills and unique experiences,
there’s something else you can draw on to distinguish
yourself : your core identity . Sometimes, there are
contributions only you can make. That was the case for Naif
Al-Mutawa, a native of Kuwait who always wanted to be a
writer . In his twenties, ﬁred up by a news report about a
local man losing his dry-cleaning job because of his religion,
Naif wrote an illustrated book about the importance of
diversity, which eventually won a UNESCO prize for
childr en’s literatur e in the service of tolerance. He won a
contract for two addition al books, but still consider ed it a
side project. “My parents said it was a great hobby, but not
to think about it for work,” he r ecalls.
By 2003, with several psychology degrees under his belt
(“as close as I could get to writing and characters”), Naif
thought he’d put his literary days behind him. But one day,
while he was riding in a cab with his sister, she encouraged
him to write  another childr en’s book. He’d also earned an
MBA from Columbia in the interim, and his mind
immediately jumped to the cost-beneﬁt analysis: “I said, ‘It
would have to be something that has the potential of
Pokemon; otherwise it wouldn’t make sense to write another
book,’” he recalls. “It was basically my way of saying, ‘Shut
up.’” But the idea began to grow on him. It turned out that
Pokemon, the viral childr en’s phenomenon, wasn’t allowed
in some Arab countries. What if, in the aftermath of 9/11, he
could create a universal story line from an Islamic
perspective?
That idea turned into The 99, a group of super heroes with
a Middle Easter n and Islamic ﬂavor who display “wisdom,
gener osity, and the basic human values we all share,” he
says. The goal? “We’re competing for the hearts and minds

--- PAGE 136 ---
of the next generation, who are sometimes taught to use
religion for hate.” The 99  began as a comic book series and,
indeed, has become a Pokemon-lik e phenomenon,  spinning
oﬀ an animated television show that airs globally and a
theme park. The 99  has even been praised as an emblem of
tolerance by President Obama. “I made sure that from the
very beginning it was crafted for a global audience, knowing
it could go global if there were the right circumstances,”
says Naif .
It migh t seem like a stretch for a psychologist—even one
with an MBA—to create a global brand of Islamic
super heroes. But his e xperience as an Arab living in America
provided the inspiration, his business school connections
helped him raise funds, and his psychology training gave
him the insights he needed to create compelling story lines.
“The characters all come with conﬂicts and problems. It’s all
the theories  I learned in organizational psychology,” he
says. Naif’s experience and worldwide success show the
power of drawing on every part of your personal experience
to create your ne xt professional identity .
Naif is a perfect example  of drawing from one’s unique
backgr ound and perspective. After 9/11, the world was
practically crying out for a social-justice-loving Arab
psychologist with an MBA to create Muslim super heroes. But
you can draw powerfully from your own identity even if it’s
unrelated to world historical forces. That was certainly the
case for Hank Phillippi Ryan, the TV reporter inspir ed to
write by her young pr oducer .1
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 137 ---
The Story Only Y ou Can T ell
Ryan, captivated by Agatha Christie and Arthur Conan Doyle
as a girl, had always wanted to write mysteries. It took well
over two decades as a TV news reporter to take the plunge.
But when her ﬁrst novel was r eleased, it was a hit, winning a
prestigious Agatha Award, due in large part to her likable
heroine Charlotte “Charl ie” McNally, an older female TV
reporter coping with the pressur es of staying relevant in a
youth- obsessed industry .
“The only reason these books are as textured, thoughtful,
reﬂective, and honest as they are is that the person who is
me now can write that,” says Hank, now in her early sixties
and the author of several popular novels. “Twenty years
ago, I was such a diﬀer ent person. I wouldn’t have written
these things; the attitud e would have been completely
diﬀer ent. I’m writing about a woman in midlife, a TV
reporter, facing the possibility the camera doesn’t love her
anymor e. Since I was that twenty years ago, it was
impossible for me to face that. I would have fought it, but
now I embrace it.”
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 138 ---
Start with the Basics—Your
Appearance as a Brand
Some might say it makes sense for you to base your brand
on skills or experiences or important parts of your identity .
You’ve work ed hard to develop them through commitment
and hard work (like Susan’s mastery of real estate ﬁnance),
or they’r e reﬂective of key values you hold (like Naif’s
commitment to a tolerant Islam). But what if your brand is
shaped, in others’ minds, by factors outside your contr ol?
What if, regardless of your preferences, others insist on
noticing something extraneous? The only solut ion is to
recognize what others are seeing and take contr ol of your
brand.
I frequently hear from executives who are concer ned they
may be viewed negatively because of physical
characteristics or fundamental traits. It’s certainly easier to
break in if you ﬁt the mold—the preppy, white, hedge fund
guy; the vaguely dorky IT genius; or the sexy blonde
saleswoman. But what I’ve also seen is this: it’s much
harder to stand out. How are you diﬀer ent from the other
preppy white  guys? You’ll have to work hard to make the
case. But if you manage to break in and your diﬀer ence is
obvious, you’r e already attracting the attention you need to
build a powerful brand. Your presumed weakness can, in
fact, become your strength. That’s what happened with my
former employer, R obert R eich.
I work ed as Reich’s press secretary when he ran for
Massachusetts gover nor. From the beginning, voter s and the
media were fascinated by him. He was already a national
celebrity, having served as US Labor Secretary in President
Clinton’s administration and then writing a revealing
memoir about his experie nces. The public was keen to meet
him and see him in action. But he knew from long

--- PAGE 139 ---
experience that when he enter ed a room, they were in for a
surprise. Everyone knew Reich was short; he’d even jokingly
titled his memoir Locked in the Cabinet . But he wasn’t
“short for a guy.” He was very short —4 feet, 101/2 inches,
to be speciﬁ c. And if you’re trying to win someone’s vote,
you don’t want them to feel shock ed or uncomfortable,
because it distracts from the message you’r e trying to
deliver about jobs or health car e or the envir onment.
So Bob, with his trademar k humor, would raise the subject
ﬁrst. He’d crack jokes about his height so the audience
would laugh with him, not at him. (He even published a
book of essays during the campaign entitled I’ll Be Short .) In
the process, he establish ed himself as a diﬀer ent kind of
politician, one who doesn’t take himself too seriously . He
took a physi cal trait that could have held him back—af ter
all, politics is rife with the adage that the “taller candidate
always wins”—and instead used it to his advantage, making
him uniquely memorable. “I like that short guy,” voters
would muse. “He’s really smart.” (He didn’t end up winning
the nomination. But then again, neither did any of the other,
taller white guys. They all lost to a candidate who was even
more diﬀer entiated: a woman.)
Mark eting guru Seth Godin, who is completely bald, has
similarly taken a notice able physical characteristic and
made it part of his brand. Two of his books featur e his head
—just fr om the eyes up—on their covers, and on his website,
you’r e instructed to “Click on Seth’s head to read his blog!”2
If someone is going to notice your physical traits anyway,
you might as well contr ol the conversation.
Try This
 

--- PAGE 140 ---
Make a list of the things about yourself that most
surprise people when you tell them at cocktail parties
(you were in the Peace Corps, you can speak Finnish,
you’r e a for mer pr ofessional sax ophonist).
Now write down your professional skills—the things you
might tout to a r ecruiter (you’r e a ter riﬁc negotiator, you
have deep management expertise, you code faster  than
anyone). List at least two “proof points” for each—a
story you can tell that demonstrates your expertise
vividly .
Mix and match your lists. As you think about your future
goals, which align best? Which combinations are most
interesting, surprising, or memorable? (People aren’t
likely to forget a Finnish-speaking, jazz-pl aying
computer pr ogrammer .)
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 141 ---
The Perils of “Fixing” Your Brand
Sometimes, there may be a temptation to ﬁx what others
might perceive as a physical shortcoming. But proceed with
caution. It turns out that those elements may actually be a
crucial part of your brand, making you memorable and
likable. That’s what happe ned with Jennifer Grey, who was a
famous actress in the 1980s, starring as Ferris Bueller’s
sister and, most iconically, as “Baby,” the shelter ed young
woman who falls for P atrick Swayze in Dirty Dancing .
In a world of Stepfor d-like actresses, Grey was special: she
had a distinctive nose that ﬂouted all the supposed
Hollywood requir ements. At ﬁrst, her appearance  hurt her
ﬁlm career. “I was too Jewish for Flashdance, ” Grey told the
New York Times  in 1987. “I didn’t even make it in to see
Zeﬃr elli for Endless Love. His assistan t said, “ ‘Sorry, we’re
looking for a beautiful girl.’”3 But all that changed af ter Dirty
Dancing,  a surprise hit that she seemed destined to play. “I
became r ecognizable, known and loved by so many people,”
she said. “I didn’t look like a movie star. I had a Jewish nose.
People loved seeing that.”4
But, ultimately, she felt the need to change it. In the
1990s, she had a rhinoplasty that altered the way she
looked so drastically that many people consid ered her
unrecognizable. She was pretty, sure, but she didn’t look
like Jennifer Grey. This scenario (fairly dire for an actress
whose face is her brand ) became such a running joke in
Hollywood, she was actually cast as a ﬁctionalized version of
herself in the short-lived TV show It’s Like, You Know . . . ,
playing an actress with a stalled career. In 2010, more than
twenty years after her Dirty Dancing  success, her footwork
paid oﬀ again: she won the coveted Dancing with the Stars

--- PAGE 142 ---
competition on TV, raising her proﬁle and ensuring that
people would ﬁnally recognize the “new” Jennifer Grey. But
still, newspapers reported, she said that getting a new nose
was the worst mistak e she had ever made.5
In a competitive mark etplace, no one is interested in how
you’r e the same as every one else. Though it may be human
to want to downplay your diﬀer ences, that may actually
extinguish part of what makes you successful. Embrace your
diﬀer ences, and you can tur n them into your str engths.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 143 ---
REMEMBER:
    Think creatively about your skills. Being a legal
scholar doesn’t just mean you know the law; it means
you speak multiple languages, are great at dedu ctive
reasoning, and can mak e articulate oral ar guments. How
do those abilities translate to your new profess ional
goal?
    The branding terrain may have changed. Unique
attributes from ﬁve years  ago (you know how to blog!)
may have become commonplace. What’s distinct about
you in today’s mark etplace?
    Ask yourse lf: what do you have that they don’t? Turn
around your opponents’ arguments. If they say you
can’t make it in the nonpr oﬁt world because you’ve only
work ed on Wall Street, that’s likely the exact reason
you’ll succeed; you bring value no one else does.
    Think about the power of your personal identity . Is
there a contribution only you can make because of your
unique mix of backgr ound, skills, and e xperience?
    If you’r e diﬀer ent from others in your desir ed ﬁeld
(such as a woman in ventur e capital), you may ﬁnd it
harder to break in. But you’r e likely to be more
memorable and successful once you’r e in the door .
    If your appearance is unusual and likely to be
noticed by others, don’t shy away from acknowledging
it, and don’t rush to chan ge it. That element may be an
important part of what mak es your brand memorable.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 144 ---
CHAPTER 8
Build Your Narrative
Now that you’ve identiﬁed the unique talent, skill, or
perspective that sets you apart from everyone else in your
space, it’s time to craft a powerful story that explains it.
Humans unde rstand the world around them through stories,
narratives we tell ourselves about what’s happening and
why. So when we come upon discor dant information or
stories that don’t make sense, it can be perple xing and
annoying. In fact, as Malcolm Gladwell famously wrote in
The Tipping Point, kids who are confused by the action they
see on television will simply turn away and disengage. For
better or for worse, adults ar en’t much diﬀer ent.
As you seek to rebrand yourself, you’r e going to have to
come up with a convincing narrative to explain your
transfor mation, whether it’s a small one (I was an engineer,
and now I want to develop my management and supervisory
skills), or something huge (I used to run a yoga studio, but
now I’ve decided to work on Wall Street). I use the word
convincing  delibe rately : of course, your choices are valid,
regardless of what others think. But, like the proverbial tree
falling in the forest, your rebranding isn’t going to do you
much good if other people don’t get it or choose to ignor e it.
Consequently, you need to take a step back and construct
a story that others can understand and appreciate. No one
condones murder, but they can at least understand if a man
is aven ging his wife’s killer (and, of course, that’s the plot of

--- PAGE 145 ---
many movies). People may not think it’s wise for you to
abandon your 401(k) and job security, but they can respect
it if you’re following a long-standing dream. And they might
not even think you’r e qualiﬁed to become a management
consultant if you’ve previously been a poet, but your story
can and should convince  them it’s the right move. So how
do you do it? In this chapter, you’ll lear n how to:
 
Make the connections between your past and present
obvious to others
Find the hidden, underlying themes that connect  your
professional e xperiences
Explain your trajectory in ter ms of the value you bring to
others
Plus, we’ll cover :
 
You can’t be who you ar en’t
You have to believe in yourself
Embodying your new brand
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 146 ---
Make the Connections Obvious
When Toby Johnson gradu ated from West Point, her ﬁrst job
out of college was the furthest thing possible from entry -
level paper pushing: she became an Apache helicopter pilot,
the only woman in a class of thirty trainees. Her
perfor mance—over seven  years in the army, including a
tour in Iraq—won raves. She was lauded by her supervisors
and was even featur ed in an army advertising campaign.
But when she decided to leave the military to attend
business school, she faced one big disadvantage compar ed
to her classmates, many of whom enter ed with corporate
experience: “The only big organization I’d ever work ed for
was the United States Ar my.”
So how do you compete for job oﬀers with talented peers
who have clear, compelling stories to tell about their time in
the corporate world? After all, ﬂying a helicopter  may not
seem directly relevant to corporate success. Toby knew the
lessons were transferable, but she’d have to connect the
dots for potential employers. Her mission was to create a
narrative that both made sense and captivated them. “I
used my military e xperience as an advantage,” she says.
She had to craft a story  that made sense to skeptical
hiring mana gers, stressing the management experience
she’d gained in the military (at age twenty -four, she was in
charge of eight $30 million Apache helicopters, plus the
thirty people who managed them) and the rapid learning
made possible by her early leadership experience. Many of
her peers, trying management out for the ﬁrst time,
wouldn’t yet have found their unique style and could make
some costly mistak es in the interim.
In other words, Toby took charge of her story and ensur ed
that what was clear to her (she’s building on her

--- PAGE 147 ---
management and leadership experience and taking it to a
new arena) was also understandable to others (who might
otherwise question what a helicopter pilot could bring to a
corporation). Her strategy work ed; today, she’s a fast-rising
executive at a multinational consumer goods company .
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 148 ---
Find Your Hidden, Underlying Themes
As Toby’s experience shows, there are often underlying
themes that guide us professionally . They may not be
obvious to others, who are too busy making surface-level
connections. But it’s essential that we take the time to spell
them out, because consistency and reliability are consider ed
fundamental virtues in the workfor ce. Even if we’re
changing careers or making a fairly dramatic leap up the
corporate ladder, we can gain understanding, respect, and
support if we show others we’re following a clear path. That
was the case for John Davidow, a public radio executive
who, in his ﬁf ties, took on a new pr ofessional challenge.
Think “inter net expert” and you’r e likely to conjur e up a
hoodie-clad millennial. So when John, a veteran of
traditional media for three decades, was appointed to head
up online operations at his station, it may have raised some
eyebr ows. But he embraced the change eagerly, in part
because of his sense that the new online world wasn’t a
break with his media past but, rather, a continuation of it.
“My whole career, I’ve been a bit of a nonconfor mist,” he
says. He began his career in TV news at the start of the
satellite era and “we were in many ways deﬁning what local
television news was. There still weren’t really rules of the
road.”
He sensed that same liminal potential in the online world.
“This stuﬀ I’m doing now—online news, engagement,
storytelling—it’s all reminiscent of that time when there
were so many cr eative opportunities.” Even though the tools
may be diﬀer ent (social media instead of satellite trucks),
the basics of creating a powerful news experienc e are the
same. So John isn’t a newbie digital executive with only a
few years of experience. Instead, he argues he’s been doing
the same thing for his entir e car eer: telling stories and being

--- PAGE 149 ---
a chan ge agent. “I’ve always been most eﬀective when I’m
working in places with fewer grown-ups,” he says. “That
way we’re able to innovate and create. This is simply a new
way to be engaged and challenged and entr epreneurial.”
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 150 ---
Extending Y our “Product Line”
John showed how executives can gain credibility in a new
ﬁeld by highlighting less obvious connections to their past
experience. Well-known author Tim Ferriss’s experience is
an example of a related strategy : extending your product
line.
Ferriss was a guy always looking for shortcuts. While
growing up on Long Island, he was obsessed with topics like
learning new languages and speed reading. How could you
do it better? Faster? Weren’t there best practices and
loopholes you could exploit? Still in his twenties, he’d
founded BrainQUICKEN, an online sports nutrition company
he says brought in $40,000 per month, but was making him
tired, overwork ed, and miserable. On a long-awaited
European vacation, Ferriss writes, he had “a nervous
breakdown the ﬁrst morning” because of his pent-up stress,
prompting him to kick-start a new, more strategic way of
living. Thus was born his blockbuster The 4-Hour Workweek:
Escape 9–5, Live Anywher e, and Join the New Rich,  a paean
to “life-hacking” your way to fame, fortune, and leisur e.
The 4-Hour Workweek  is technicall y a business book, and
that’s wher e Ferriss, leveraging his start-up street cred,
originally gained fame. (Indeed, an early New York Times
proﬁle highlights the extreme—and counterintuitive—
devotion he inspir ed among the Silicon V alley elite, given his
recommendation to sharply limit e-mail consumption and
embark upon a “low-infor mation diet.”1) The book puts
forwar d productivity tips that certainly could juice up your
professional life: hiring virtual assistants from India , creating
a proﬁtable online business, convincing your boss to let you
work fr om home, managing time, and setting goals, to name
just a few .

--- PAGE 151 ---
But it’s clear Ferriss’s interests and inspirations are wide-
ranging. He touts international travel and the beneﬁts of
“geoarbitrage”—that is, making money in American dollars
and spending it in cheaper locales. He encourages readers
not to wait until they’r e sixty-ﬁve to fulﬁll their travel
fantasies, but instead to take “mini-r etirements” and
embrace a mobile lifestyle in which they can work from
anywher e. He touts the virtues of language study (he
speaks ﬁve, and on his blog, shares techniques for hacking
the process to learn more quickly) and learning sports or
mastering other forms of local cultur e (two of his favorites
are Argentine tango and Japanese horseback archery). It’s a
vision that’s hard to resist. So once you’ve cultivated a
passionate fan base and a sterling brand as a business
author (Fast Company  named him one of the “Most
Innovative Business P eople of 2007”), what do you do?
If you’re Tim Ferriss, you write a diet and exercise book.
Say what?
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 152 ---
Bridging Y our Brand Gap
On the surface, Ferriss’s choice of sequel might seem
bizar re. After all, he’s not a doctor, a nutrition coach, or a
famous athle te (though he does recount an incident in The
4-Hour Workweek  in which he wins the gold medal at the
1999 Chine se Kickbo xing National Championships by
exploiting a technicality and pushing his opponent oﬀ an
elevated platform). But his newer work— The 4-Hour Body :
An Uncommon Guide to Rapid Fat-Loss, Incredible Sex, and
Becoming Super human —can actually be viewed as a savvy
next step for someone who r efuses to be bo xed in.
“I don’t want  to put out ‘The 31/2 Hour Workweek’  or ‘The
3-Hour Workweek.’ It would be boring for me to produce and
it would be boring, I think, for many people to consume,”
Ferriss told the Signal vs. Noise  blog, run by the trendy
software ﬁrm 37signals.2 Ferriss was hungry for a new
challenge and—just as he advised his readers to avoid the
stagnation of jobs they didn’t enjoy—str ove to avoid a long-
term car eer recycling the same br omides.
“A big part of it [The 4-Hour Body ] was diversif ying my
identity,” he said. “I didn’t want to paint myself into a
corner wher e I felt obligated to maintain a certain level of
‘success.’ Even if The 4-Hour Body  were to do far worse
than The 4-Hour Workweek,  I felt this was a necessary step
for my own personal preservation. I also wanted to diversif y
the public perception of my expertise. I want people,
hopefully, to read my material because of the way I
deconstruct problems, not because of the speciﬁ c subject
matter . I would rather be in the same vein as Malcolm
Gladwell or Geor ge Plimpton than someone who’s known for
just being an expert in one subject matter .” Ferriss used
three winning strategies in extending his brand, so that the
transition was understandable and palatable to r eaders.

--- PAGE 153 ---
First, he built on the already -recognizable “4-Hour ” brand,
forcing readers to see a commonality between his books,
despite their diﬀer ent subject matter . Second, he r ose above
the narrow conﬁnes of being a business author and created
his own category . It’s a huge leap from “business” to
“health.” But viewed another way, it’s just a logical
continuation of Ferriss’s expertise in “lifestyle design,” a
term he invented to encompass creating the best lifestyle
with the least amount of time, eﬀort, and money (and own a
new search engine category, since topics like “productivity”
were already  saturated).  And third, Ferriss branched out
strategically . In August 2011, he signed a much- vaunted
deal with Amazon’s new publishing arm for his third book,
The 4-Hour Chef. Going directly from the business aisle to
writing a cookbook would be a radical departur e, but Ferriss
prepared his readers (and built a ready audience of buyers)
with the transitional 4-Hour Body,  bridging the gap by
applying business-style pr oductivity tips to ﬁtness.
The wider world would have been happy to label Ferriss a
business author and wonder why he’d ever want to write
health and ﬁtness books . But Ferriss, in claiming a new
identity and category for himself, was able to argue that he
wasn’t makin g a radical leap, just building on a direction
he’d alr eady started.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 154 ---
Explain the Value You Bring
The last crucial piece in telling your story is explaining that
your change isn’t simply a sign of narcissism. Everyone has
passions and things they’d love to do . It’s nice to be fulﬁlled,
but it’s also nice to be an adult and pay your mortgage. So
how can you get people to care? To respect your decision?
To take you seriously? You have to explain it’s not about
you; it’s about the value you bring.
That was the challenge facing Libby Wagner, a Seattle-
based poet who made a transition into management
consulting. A tenur ed community college professor who
taught poetry, women’s studies, and creative writing, she
literally could  have kept her job forever. But when her sister
died of br east cancer, she r ealized she needed a change.
During her time in academia, she’d been responsible for
developing a statewide program for instructor deve lopment.
The state department of corrections took notice and
recruited her to overs ee employee development and
training. “Everyone was like, ‘What? Giving up your tenur ed
job and selling your hous e?’” Soon, she also questioned her
decision; within a few months, she realized it wasn’t a ﬁt.
“The only reason I succeeded in academia was the
autonomy; there was no time clock, and I could set my
schedule,” she recalls. “But I wouldn’t have described
myself as an entrepreneu r; I didn’t have that langu age. On a
college camp us, MBAs don’t hang out with poets; we don’t
think we have anything in common.”
But at the department of corrections, she threw herself
into the world of MBAs. When her boss warned Libby that
her job was in jeopar dy due to budget cuts, “I took
advantage of every possible professional development
opportunity I could get my hands on while I was still
working. I made a commitment to learn everythin g I could

--- PAGE 155 ---
about this world I was entering into, that was very diﬀer ent
than academia.” She joined professional groups and drilled
into the minutiae of the job. “It was like management boot
camp,” she says. “Ther e was every possible weird employee
issue; it was lik e a petri dish.”
Eventually, she decided to launch her own consulting
business. She’d picked up enough chops and management
lingo during her time at the department of corrections to be
convincing as a consultant, but she was still ashamed to
open up about her past life. “I didn’t want anyone to know I
was a poet,” she says. “I had a lot of tapes going in my
head. The economists I had work ed with had really talked
down to me, and people in business certainly weren’t
interested in what I did. I was so afraid. In the very
beginning, I thought I should try to go to Harvar d and get an
MBA.” But she held oﬀ and decided to try without it.
Soon, she realized that her clients weren’t asking about
her credentia ls: “When they see that what I do actually
works, then nobody cares. Nobody has ever asked me if I
have an MBA, ever.” In fact, she says, “I think my not having
an MBA gives me an advantage; I can ask all the ‘new girl’
questions and it makes them step out of their paradigm for
a little while to see if what they’r e doing is working for
them.”
And it turns out the very skills she honed as a poet were
the ones most relevant in her consulting. “The way I see the
world is very language-driven,” she says. “I’m going to be
listening for nuances and connections and patter ns. That’s
the way I look at the world and I take that to any interaction
with the client, so I’ve lear ned to ask r eally good questions.”
Today, Libby  has consulted for Fortune  500 clients
including Boeing and Nik e, and she’s christened her monthly
e-newsletter The Boardroom Poet. The secret to embracing
her own narrative from poet to consultant was embracing

--- PAGE 156 ---
the value she could bring to her clients. As she wrote in a
recent essay , “my clients want results. They want to know
that the money, time and eﬀort they are going to invest will
give them what they want: higher proﬁts, more engaged
workplaces, less stress, success in their endeavors. I can do
this, exactly as I am . . . When I show up as a poet,
entrepreneur, and ordinary smart person, I can then help
others be who they need to be, too .”3
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 157 ---
Your Road-to-Damascus Moment
Sometimes, your narrative reveals a linear transition (Toby
going from leading soldiers to leading executives, or Libby
using the power of language, ﬁrst in poetry and then in
management consulting). Other times, it just doesn’t. Your
transition may be harsh, abrupt, and shocking, and the only
explanation you can oﬀer is the truth: something powerful
changed in you.
“She must have been in her early twenties,” recalls  Phyllis
Stein, the career counselor . Her client wanted to break into
the music industry, but her reasons were poorly developed;
she mostly seemed drawn to its glamor . “We had about
three session s, and then I didn’t hear from her. I didn’t know
what happen ed until she came back six months later. She’d
been in a major automobile accident, and she wanted to
pick up with the work we’d done.”
But, after spending months in the hospital and enduring
painful surgeries, her priorities had changed completely,
and the music industry no longer interested her. Says Stein,
“She went from frivolous to very, very serious about taking
science class es in order to do the work she wanted  to do in
medicine. It was dramatic, the gr owth and maturity .”
The most famous sudden transfor mation dates to the
story of Saul in the Chris tian Bible, who was heading from
Jerusalem on the road to Damascus to arrest supporters of
Jesus. While in transit, he is struck down by a light from
heaven and suddenly comes to believe that Jesus is the Son
of God. He feels compelled to publicly proclaim his new
belief and thereby becomes St. Paul, one of the most
famous evangelists in church history . Most “rebranding
revelations” aren’t divine, of course, but they often involve
a dramatic humbling and the lessons lear ned fr om it.

--- PAGE 158 ---
No one seeks out an accident, or an addiction, or (in the
case of fallen-then-r edeemed lifestyle guru Martha Stewart)
a stint in prison. But in some cases, those dram atic and
painful events can lead to true growth and a meaningful
change in how you, and others, see yourself .
Try This
 
Write down your explanation—no more than two
sentences—about why you’r e making a transition. Stay
away from self-indulgent story lines; highlight how you
want to apply your skills to new domains or learn new
things.
What’s the value you bring? Write down one or two
sentences identifying the unique knowledge or skills you
have that others in your new domain might not.
Find your common thread. You’re not rejecting one
identity in favor of another; you’r e transitioning across
an isthmus linking the old and new brands. How can you
articulate that commonality?
Practice telling your story  to close friends. Does it sound
plausible? Responsible? Strategic? You want honest
feedback; your goal is something that will sound
compelling and make sense even to people you’re
meeting for the ﬁrst time.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 159 ---
The First Caveat: You Can’t Be Who
You Aren’t
With all this talk about rebranding yourself and crafting a
narrative to explain your transition, there might be a
temptation to go all out. If you’r e in rebranding mode, why
not become the person you’ve always wanted to be? Why
not become the perfect person ? I’m a fan of self-
improvement; that’s why I wrote this book. But it’s
important to caution that there are limits to reinvention. You
can’t simply concoct a new personality, and in our society,
there’s nothing worse than a phony . Your friends and
colleagues will notice (and be appalled), and in our
increasingly connected world, it’s safe to say that others will
hear about it, as well.
All that seems obvious, but the message still hasn’t
reached some powerful executives (who imagine they can
simply decree a new identity) or high-level politicians (who
turn their personas over to smooth-talking Svengali
consultants). One of these execs is Alex Bogusk y, the
wunderkind impresario behind the advertising agency
Crispin Porter + Bogus ky. His ﬁrm created innovative
campaigns for brands like Virgin Atlantic, Burger King, and
Volkswagen, and was named Advertising Age’s “Agency of
the Decade.” But in early 2010, Bogusk y decided to leave it
all behind. Danielle Sacks, a Fast Company  writer, had
interviewed Bogusk y two years earlier in a cover story,
declaring him “the Steve  Jobs of the Ad World.” But this
time, she said, “It quickly became clear that he was not the
same man I had written about . . . Back then, he had been
as clever, brash, and iconoclastic as the campaigns that
earned him a reputation as the most danger ous weapon in

--- PAGE 160 ---
advertising . . . Yet the Bogusk y sitting befor e me in
Manhattan sounded more like some of the activists I’d
interviewed in this era of ﬁnancial and envir onmental crises.
Instead of talking brands,  Bogusk y riﬀed on the inequities of
Wall Street, the ﬂaws of corporate structur e, and the need
for social and envir onmental transpar ency. He was a man
released, trying on the clothes of a new and as yet
undeﬁned life.”4
Bogusk y, a denizen of eco-conscious Boulder, Colorado,
has embraced a new life as an investor in green start-ups
and the proprietor of the FearLess Cottage, a gathering
place for people Bogusk y would like to hang with (each
entry card reads, “The recipients of this card have
demonstrated that they are capable of pushing aside fear in
pursuit of doing the right thing”). He recounted to Fast
Company  his realization that his advertising work conﬂicted
with his emer ging consciousness about the dangers of fast
food and sodas: “You compr omise your voice slowly over
time,” he said, “and then you have a moment wher e you’r e
like, ‘Wow, that really isn’t what I think’ . . . I heard my
mouth disconnected fr om my soul.”
It sounds like a classic midlife crisis story—a successful
multimillionair e taking laudable steps to conﬁgur e his life to
better reﬂect his values. Bogusk y, slightly teary, conceded
as much to Fast Company : “I fear a moment when my
childr en are older, and they look at me and say, ‘What did
you do? The world is like a spiraling cesspool. You were an
adult, you needed to do something. I was just a kid. What
did you do?’ I want to be able to say, I did this, this, and
this. And did my best.”
But halfway through a fairly typical proﬁle of a changed
man, tinged with newfo und Zen consciousness, we get
something radically diﬀer ent. “I’m back in New York,” writes
Sacks, “doing follow-up interviews by phone, and a former

--- PAGE 161 ---
Crispin senior creative has been ranting for more than two
hours about the ‘phony life wrecker’ he used to work for. As
I continue calling around, it becomes appar ent that all those
hours of candid, ‘fearless’ reckoning I shared with Bogusk y
may not have been quite as fearless or as candid as I
thought.”
It doesn’t seem to be one or two disgruntled employees
that have it in for Bogusk y. Sacks quotes a variety of former
colleagues (all unnamed, claiming a fear of retribution) who
decry him in terms such as “megalomaniac, sociopath,
[and] narcissist” and compar e him to Fidel Castr o, Caligula,
and Hannibal Lecter . They describe an abusive boss who
manipulated staﬀ, created a sweatshop envir onment, and
didn’t hesitate to humiliate people in public.
If that were anything close to the truth, it wouldn’t be a
bad idea for Bogusk y to revamp his brand and consider
some new ways of doing business. But unlike lifestyle
maven Martha Stewart’s road-to -Damascus experience, in
which she appear ed to genuinely learn from her fall from
grace, Bogusk y is portrayed as clueless about his own
culpability and indiﬀer ent to the impact he had on others.
“Towar d the end of our talk,” Sacks writes, “I press to see if
he feels any remorse. ‘Do I feel bad about how I’ve treated
some of my employees in the past?’ he responds, taking an
uncharacteristically long pause. ‘I want to say yes, but I’m
not feeling that.’ ”
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 162 ---
How Al Gore Lost—Then F ound—His Branding Mojo
Politicians have a notoriously hard time reinventing their
brands. The public and the press just don’t buy it, but that
doesn’t stop campaigns from trying. (Case in point: the
uproar spark ed by an aide to Mitt Romney, who glibly
declar ed to CNN that his candidate’s positions could be
recalibrated just lik e an Etch-a-Sk etch.)
In 2000, Al Gore was also a conﬂicted man. He’d built up a
solid reputation: eight years as a competent vice president,
dutifully spearheading initiatives on things like improving
gover nment eﬃciency . But his predecessor, Bill Clinton,
loomed lar ge. Gor e was stiﬀ and patrician wher e Clinton was
loose and accessible. And though at the time Gore himself
had a reputa tion for marital rectitude, he still feared being
tarred with the tumult of Clinton’s Monica Lewinsk y scandal
and subsequent investigation. So how do you harness the
best elements of Bill Clinton’s brand without takin g on the
worst? Gore made the obvious choice and turned to Bob
Shrum.
Shrum was a storied Democratic consultant, who had
risen to fame as a speechwriter (crafting Ted Kennedy’s
immortal “The Dream Shall Never Die” speech) and
eventually became an overall consiglier e and mastermind,
raking in handsome fees and spurring insecur e candidates
to enter into the “Shrum Primary,” in which they would beg,
plead, and outbid each other in order to win Shrum for their
team. Of course, there was also an underbelly—the “Shrum
Curse.” Shrum was not part of Bill Clinton’s team and
couldn’t claim  credit for his victory . Instead, his track record,
at least at the presidential level, was dismal. (Now retired,
his grand total was eight losing presidential campaigns.) But
he had nonetheless beco me a power house, an éminence
grise, and a favorite of the establishment.

--- PAGE 163 ---
Part of the knock on Shrum was that he forced his
candidates into a mold, prompting them to sound alike and
mouth words that just didn’t sound right for them. It’s easy
to look back now, especi ally after watching the carnage of
the John Kerry presidential campaign, which Shrum also
shepher ded. But in the heat of battle during the 2000
election, Al Gore—so frustrated by the weak image his eight
years of second-bananahood had wrought that he turned to
feminist author Naomi Wolf for sartorial advice—m ade what
he thought was a sound choice. He allowed Shrum to
reshape him into a ﬁre-breathing crusader for “working
families,” dramatically speechif ying about “The People vs.
the P owerful.”
“The battle lines are drawn,” Shrum told the New York
Times  that summe r. “Al Gore comes out of the convention
much more clearly deﬁned to people. There’s a choice on a
thematic dimension: Who’s going to stand up and ﬁght for
middle-class families on pr escription drugs, a patients’ bill of
rights and education?”5
The problem was, no one bought it. Gore, known to
Americans for well over a decade as a friendly -but-bland
policy wonk obsessed with the envir onment, was simply not
believable as a populist cowboy, ready to ’rassle with
Geor ge W. Bush. There are limits to how far your brand can
stretch. Tim Ferriss can make a good case that business
productivity and “hacking your body” are linked. And Gore
surely could have tweak ed his image to bolster his alpha-
male credentials in less obvious ways. But when you go too
far, you risk looking like a fake. At that point, you’ve lost all
credibility .
Despite Gore’s heartbr eak in Florida and the loss of the
presidency, there is a happy ending to his brand
reinvention. Returning to his passion of envir onmental
advocacy and “re-rebran ding” himself as the dedicated

--- PAGE 164 ---
policy wonk he always was, he regained his mojo and
became the subject of an Oscar -winning ﬁlm and recipient
of the Nobel Peace Prize. Patience—and being honest with
yourself about your real interests, personality, and brand—
can pay inspiring dividends.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 165 ---
The Second Caveat: You Have to
Believe in Yourself
Self-doubt is extremely common, even among the people
you’d least expect. Years ago, when the start-up wher e Alisa
Cohn had been working announced that all employees had
to relocate to San Francisco—or else—she got the push she
needed to start her own executive coaching business. But,
at only twenty -seven, Cohn quickly felt the pressur e: people
expected their advice to come from sage graybear ds, not
recent grads. “The ﬁrst few times people asked what I did,”
she recalls, “I said, ‘I’m a coach?’ in that up-talk way we do
when we’re not so sure—asking permission, ‘Is it OK to be a
coach?’ ” She found solace commiserating with a doctor
friend who faced the same situation. As her friend advised
her, “ther e’s a distinction  between being a med student and
as soon as you graduate, saying ‘I’m a doctor .’ But you start
saying that and it’s an identity shift for you; at ﬁrst you
don’t believe it. But people begin to tr eat you lik e a doctor .”
So Cohn took the advice. “I’d begin to say to people, a
little less diﬃdently, ‘I’m an executive coach.’ And they’d
ask me more about it, so I had to learn to talk about my
profession. If they were really interested, they began to
treat me, as young as I was, like a coach, and they’d talk
about their situation. So I began to have more conﬁdence in
myself as a coach.” She was so uncomfortable with
promoting her new business, it took her nearly two years
befor e she sent out a mass e-mail to her friends and
contacts, letting them know about her new business (“I had
this idea that people would say, ‘Can’t she settle down?’ ”).
But more than a decade later, Cohn now has a thriving
practice coaching high-level Fortune  500 e xecutives.
As Cohn’s example shows, self-doubt has almost no
relation to your skills or talents; she was perfectly  capable

--- PAGE 166 ---
of coaching executives eﬀectively when she started her
business. But the hardest part of making a transition can be
bridging the gap between how others used to perceive you
(and how you used to perceive yourself) and how you’d like
to be seen moving forward. The answer? Fake it till you
make it. That doesn’t imply deception or disingenuousness.
Instead, it recognizes that there’s a time lag betw een fully
inhabiting the “old you” and the “new you.” Until you really
get comfortable with the new identity, the best course is to
pretend that you’r e already ther e.
In other wor ds, contrary to most people’s fears, people ar e
not looking to nitpick your identity . If you say you’r e an
executive coach, it’s a pretty rare (and dysfunctional)
person who will challenge you on it. If you act conﬁ dent and
clearly embody the perso n you want to be, you’r e creating a
powerful feedback loop wher e people reinfor ce and validate
your identity , and eventually that sinks in and you fully
become what you want to be.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 167 ---
Embody Your New Brand
Sometimes one helpful secret, silly as it may sound, is to
use props. The right outﬁt or conte xt can dramatically aﬀect
your conﬁden ce and behavior . As leadership expert Warren
Bennis r ecounts in his autobiography,
During the war [WWII], being a soldier had considerable
panache and came with an impressive costume —my
handsome new unifor m. And much as a good actor
does, when I put on that unifor m and the gold bars that
went with it, I instantly became an oﬃcer in the U.S.
Army. The role I stepped into prescribed certain
attitudes and behaviors, and it also provided models for
how I was to act. It empo wered me to try on selves  that
nothing in my past had suggested to me. I was e xpected
to lead my men and give and enfor ce orders and so I
did, without any of the hesitation or insecurity that was
natural to the boy I had been as a civilian. The unifor m
gave me permission—r equir ed me, really—to observe
the oﬃcers around me and to ﬁnd potential strategies
for being a successful oﬃcer in their example . . . in an
almost magical way, the unifor m seemed to bestow on
me the abilit y to do what I had to do. It was talisman
and inspiration, a symbol of my new authority and a
mark of my new r esponsibility .6
Bennis isn’t the only one susceptible to the power of a
unifor m; he recalls in his memoir how the ﬁlm director
Sydney Pollack told him that early in his career, he didn’t
know how to be a director, so he “tried to dress like a
director—clothes that were kind of outdoorsy .” Noted
Bennis, “The role and a persuasive costume from L.L. Bean
allowed Pollack to behave like a director until he truly
became one.”

--- PAGE 168 ---
The moral here isn’t that you need military unifor ms or
safari vests to do your job. Rather, it’s that everyone
experiences a moment (or many moments) of doubt when
they transition to a new role. The fastest way to overcome it
is to throw yourself into your new identity with gusto . If a
unifor m (or a really nice new suit) helps, go for it. But do
what it takes to present yourself with conﬁdence,  and that
will inspir e the conﬁdence of others.
Developing a narrative that explains your transitio n may,
to some, seem nice to have but not mandatory . After all,
people will see your hard work and understand the direction
you’r e going . Right? Unfortunately, though, many people
can’t or won’t make the connections on their own. Until you
make it explicit, they simply won’t grasp how a helicopter
pilot can succeed in business or how a poet can become a
management consultant. It’s your job to create a story so
compelling, they can’t help but understand and get
onboar d.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 169 ---
REMEMBER:
    Others will tune out if they don’t understand the
rationale behind your transition. Find a way to make the
connections obvious between your past experience and
your futur e goal.
    No one will care about or respect your rebrand  if it
seems like a narcissistic way to “ﬁnd yourself .” Make an
eﬀort to cr eate a nar rative that focuses on the value you
can bring to others.
    Rebranding is a transition or a shift, not a
Frankenstein full-body transplant. You can’t go from
cutthr oat e xecutive to Zen master without a few stops in
between; it’ll look phony and probably be phony . People
can sniﬀ out deception a mile away . The ﬁrst rule of
rebranding is to be true to yourself at all times.
    Believing in yourself is the ﬁrst step. People won’t
take your new brand seriously if you act self-conscious
or unsure of yourself . Even if it means “faking it till you
make it,” exude conﬁdence so others will get the
message.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 170 ---
CHAPTER 9
Reintroduce Yourself
Now that you’ve developed a compelling story that explains
your transition, it’s time to reintroduce yourself . People are
busy, and it’s often easier  for your friends and colleagues to
gloss over your hard work and stick to the same image of
you they’ve always had. But, since we all rely on our
networks for clients, connections, and job oﬀers, it’s up to
you to ensur e they understand that you’ve changed and
grown, and their conception of you needs to change, as
well. The secret is to orchestrate your “coming out” in the
most memor able and strategic manner possible . In this
chapter, you’ll lear n about:
 
Why status is transferable and you can take it with you
How to send the right signals
How to shift your behav ior to accor d with your new
image
How to develop validators who can reinfor ce your new
status
Why you should go wher e the action is
How to leverage symbolic actions to make an
impression
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 171 ---
Status—You Can Take It with You
It’s a common frustration  for professionals reinven ting their
careers: they’ve built up years of status and reputation in
their initial ﬁeld, and now it feels as if they’r e starting from
zero as they enter a new domain. But Jeﬀrey Pfeﬀer, a
professor at Stanfor d’s Graduate School of Business and
author of Power : Why Some People Have It—and Others
Don’t,  says not to worry. “It’s a psychological phenomenon
known as the ‘halo eﬀec t,’” he told me. “If I think you’r e
good in one domain, I think you’r e going to be good in other
domains, as well. There’s the presumption that talented
people have this set of generalized abilities.”
In other words, your status is portable and transferable,
which is why Hollywood actors are so often consider ed
credible spokespeople on social issues, or why top business
executives frequently win political oﬃce. That “durability of
reputation ”—acr oss both time and situations—mak es it
essential for you to be strategic about how you’r e perceived
from day one, says Pfeﬀer : “You need to do something to
build a very good impression, a personal brand, and that will
help you not only in your current place but in other places,
as well.”
The secret, then, is to leverage both your past
experiences and the conﬁdence that you’ve derived from
your accomplishments. After all, other people take their
cues from you, so when you’re introducing your new brand,
assume that others will welcome your contribution. That’s
the strategy Lisa, the legal scholar -turned-wine professional,
took when she launched her new career path, and her self-
assurance set the tenor of her interactions.
“I set out in a very positive manner; I was very
optimistic,” she says. “It was clear that I’m someb ody who

--- PAGE 172 ---
accomplishes things, and I could tell there would be
somebody who’d want to talk to me.” Her suspicions were
correct. “Mostly I got respect,” she recalls. “Wine is made to
be sold, and you need to talk about it, be articulate, and be
a self -starter, and it was clear that’s what I was. Most people
thought I had a lot of courage for making the choice I’d
made.” Today, she has a dream career leading advanced
wine-tasting seminars, writing about wine, and consulting
for foreign winemak ers about how to position themselves in
the American mark et.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 173 ---
Send the Right Signals
So, as in your initial self-inventory, take time to examine
how you’d appear to others at all your “touch point s.” If you
used to be a website designer but now want to do internet
strategy, you should be sure to change the text on your
website, your promotiona l materials, in your e-newsletter,
and on various social media sites. (Ther e are even more
extreme cases wher e a “materials rebrand” is in order.
Consulting expert Alan Weiss tells a story about advising an
aspiring business speak er whose eﬀorts to be taken
seriously by executives were thwarted by his use—and
heavy pr omotion—of a talking puppet.)
Notes Cohn, the executive coach, “I notice that people
have their own voices in their head and when they start
making small changes, they think they look very signiﬁcant
to the outside world. But we only see your actions, what you
say and do—all the wonderful insight and self-awareness
you’r e getting, all the great ideas aren’t aﬀecting us. So it
takes a lot to break through the noise, and you need to be
hyperawar e of what you’r e doing and make sure you’r e
signaling explicitly to the outside world what you’r e trying to
build.”
Double-check everything; don’t renew advertisements
without reviewing the wording, and if you’r e giving a
speech, print out a new bio for your introduction, just in
case they pulled something old oﬀ the web. Even your
phone greeting can be telling: does it reﬂect the impression
you want? On a political campaign I advised, I forced one
ﬁeld organizer to change  her voice-mail message,  because
“leave a message, I’ll try to call you back” didn’t  exactly
inspir e conﬁdence.
As you’r e launching a new brand, don’t forget to
proactively reach out by phoning or e-mailing your contacts

--- PAGE 174 ---
—individually—to let them know about your new direction
and, wher e appropriate, ask for their help, advice, or
business. (Blast e-mails are a start, but too often go
unread.) These are small steps, but because so much of
what people know about you these days comes from online
information, it’s critical to keep it updated; it can lead to
unexpected beneﬁts, such as when a childhood friend of
mine reconnected with me online, read my materials, and
decided I’d be a perfect speak er for a confer ence  she was
organizing. Ser endipity can happen if you’r e prepared.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 175 ---
You Don’t Have to Sa y It—Y ou Can W rite It
No one likes a braggart, so it can be hard to ﬁnd the right
way to broadcast your accomplishments. But Robert
Cialdini, the eminent psychologist and author of Inﬂuence:
The Psychology of Persuasion,  sugg ests two additional,
subtle ways we can remin d others about our new status or
identities. First, we can leverage the written word. It turns
out—for whatever quirk of cultur e—that you can get away
with writing self-promotio nal things that you simply can’t
say in person.
“You have to do it in an indirect fashion,” Cialdini told me.
For example, if you’r e meeting with a professional colleague
for the ﬁrst time, he recommends that you “send a letter of
introduction that says, ‘I’m looking forwar d to our
interaction on Thursday on the topic of X, and my
backgr ound and experience with regard to X are as
follows.’” Says Cialdini, “It’s perfectly appropriate to say
those things in a letter of introduction, but it’s not
appropriate as soon as there’s a face-to -face interaction
because you look like a boastful braggart and a self-
aggrandizer .” Since that’s the case, you might as well
leverage that opportunity and start making letters of
introduction your standar d operating pr ocedur e.
A second technique you can use, Cialdini suggests, is
displaying your credentials so they’r e visible. He consulted
for one hospital in Arizon a that was struggling to get stroke
patients to follow through with their home exercise regimen.
When Ciald ini began to investigate, he discover ed
something interesting: while the patients respected their
doctors’ expertise and credentials, they weren’t being
assigned the exercises by their doctors. Instead, physical
therapy staﬀ gave the assignments—“and we don’t know
anything about them.”

--- PAGE 176 ---
Cialdini asked the head of the physical therapy unit to
redecorate, putting up all the practitioners’ credentials,
diplomas, awards, and certiﬁcations, so patients could “see
the evidence” of their competence. The result? “Exercise
compliance jumped by 32 percent immediately,” says
Cialdini. “What I love about that is there was no burden
involved. There was no cost, and the patients beneﬁted, and
so did the therapists, the hospital, the insurance companies.
Nobody lost, and it was simply by raising to the surface
something that was true but under the surface: the
therapists’ genuine authority .”
Think about what strategies might work for you, whether
they’r e introduction letters, diplomas in your oﬃce, or more
information in your e-mail signatur e ﬁle. If the written word
is a loophole through which you can better establish your
expertise, it’s incumbent on you to mak e use of it.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 177 ---
Shift Your Behavior
Small, tangible signals are only part of the battle, however .
The biggest challenge is changing your behavior to reﬂect
your new goals and reality . For over a decade, Dan had
work ed at a large, international technology company,
ascending to the rank of engineering director . But when he
decided to leave for a newer tech company with a hip
reputation, he realized his résumé had some baggage
attached. His previous employer was well-known and
respected by the public, but in tech circles, it was viewed as
an old-line behemoth, resistant to change and full of stuﬀy
bureaucrats, not exactly the image he wanted to project to
his new colleagues. “I had to work to get other people to
understand I was comfortable in the new envir onment,” he
says. “It’s a grassr oots culture, so I had to start building
relationships and trust. It was lots of time ‘managing by
walking around,’ being as visible as possible. With anything
that smack ed of a big company, like having a standing staﬀ
meeting, I over reacted against it.”
Dan realized he had to make connections quickly to shape
his colleagues’ perception of him, but he was starting at a
disadvantage. “I discover ed my entire personal network was
at [my previous employer],” he recalls. “I decided I
shouldn’t be in that situation again.” So he embark ed on a
networking campaign to deepen his connections both inside
and outside his new company, and in the process, build a
reputation as a forwar d-thinking, connected executive who
understood industry trends. But there was only one
problem: his personality . “I’m a fairly introverted guy,” Dan
says. “I hate taking these meetings with strangers, the idea
of a meeting that’s not going to help me get the job I have
in front of me done, or getting to know people without an
action item.”

--- PAGE 178 ---
But he forced himself to persist. “I realized it was
important, that by the time you need connections, you can’t
suddenly make them. You have to be ready.” These days,
while his night- owl engine ering team is sleeping in, Dan has
a steady regimen of breakfast meetings including “people in
my industry at other companies, executive search people,
leaders at small companies, ventur e capitalists, a guy who
works on corporate turnarounds.” When it comes to making
connections, Dan says, “the biggest change is my default
answer used to be no, and now my default answ er is yes.
I’ve focused on r easons to say yes.”
His networki ng has paid oﬀ. He’s now on the pulse of
start-ups to acquir e and knows which ones are going down
(and from which he can poach talent). He’s made himself
indispensable to his company and the furthest thing from an
old school, bureaucratic manager . In fact, he’s found ways
to play with his backgr ound and upend expectations. When
he discover ed his new company requir ed receipts for all
travel expenses above $25, wher eas his old ﬁrm’s threshold
was $75, he shook up his colleagues by letting them know it
was less bureaucratic at his old company and suggested
they change the policy . He r ecalls with pleasur e: “I could use
negative branding to my advantage.” And he knows that if
he wants to change jobs in the futur e, he’s positioned
himself with the contacts and branding he need s to land
secur ely.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 179 ---
No Laughing Matter—How Al F ranken Became
Senator
Al Franken also had a branding challenge. He was certainly
well-known, thanks to his years starring on Satur day Night
Live and penning left-wing political humor books, including
Rush Limbaugh Is a Big Fat Idiot and Lies (And the Lying
Liars Who Tell Them): A Fair and Balanced Look at the Right .
He’d proudly  get into screaming matches with conservative
talk show hosts like Bill O’Reilly. In the entertainment
industry, contr oversy is good for business. But very diﬀer ent
rules apply when you’r e running for elective oﬃce.
Franken’s interest in politics had always been evident, and
the Harvard grad clearly had intellectual chops (in 2003, his
alma mater brought him back for a fellowship at the
Shorenstein Center on the Press, Politics and Public Policy).
But it was still a surprise  in 2005 when the longt ime East
Coaster moved back to Minnesota, wher e he’d grown up,
and started a political action committee called the Midwest
Values PAC. The following year, he raised over a million
dollars for Democrats across the country and made more
than ﬁfty appearances on behalf of Minnesota Democrats.
And in 2008, in a closely watched and hotly contested race,
he was elected US Senator .
But it wasn’t because of ﬁrebrand rhetoric or scathing
humor at the expense of his opponents. In fact, on the
campaign trail and once in oﬃce, Franken has used only the
gentlest humor . And, recognizing the potential knocks
against him based on his comedy career, he’s bent over
backwar d to demonstrate seriousness (securing funding for
diabetes prevention and service dogs for veterans) and
bipartisanship (his Senate bio is a veritable Republican love
fest, giving shout- outs to his crew of GOP homies). Franken,

--- PAGE 180 ---
like Dan, realized that to be viewed diﬀer ently, you have to
behave diﬀer ently, in a consistent and visible fashion.
Try This
 
Hire someone to spend a few hours combing through
your touch points (voice-mail message, e-mail address,
blog, website, social media accounts) to see if anything
is oﬀ message. (It can simply be too hard for us to
notice things ourselves.) He doesn’t have to be a trained
mark eting professional, but you want someone
reasonably smart and tech-savvy who can spot areas of
dissonance for you.
Go through your wardrobe. Is it appropriate? What
would someone looking at your clothes surmise about
you? If you’r e moving from start-ups into working  for a
law ﬁrm, you’r e going to need to upgrade to suits (and if
your move is in the other direction, you don’t want to be
the only one in a necktie). In general, copy your
prospective colleagues when it comes to the level of
fanciness, but mak e the style your own.
Make a list of three actions you can take in the next
month to enhance your brand reintroduction (secure
your own domain name, sign on to help with a major
project, upgrade your work clothes, read more industry
journals to become an infor mation hub, and so on).
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 181 ---
Develop Validators
Another important way we can convey our new identities is
through external validators, that is, other people talking us
up. As a power house group of resear chers led by both
Jeﬀrey Pfeﬀer and R obert Cialdini discover ed, the secr et is to
have someone else do the bragging for you. “People don’t
like people who self-promote,” Pfeﬀer told me. “But
ironically, even if you self-promote through the mouths of
other people , somehow that stigma doesn’t get associated
with you. It’s much better to have someone else toot your
horn.”
One possibil ity is to create a pact with a like-minded
wingman to take turns promoting each other . This could
take the form of him talking you up to colleagues, making
juicy introductions at networking events (“You have to meet
my friend Dorie; she has a new book out you’d love!”), or
bringing up conversational topics wher e you e xcel.
Some people  would view it as phony or shameless. I think
that’s exactl y why you should do it. Too many people are
missing a clear opportunity . After all, what’s so wrong with
consciously striving to promote the best attributes of your
friend, and having him pique others’ interest in you? At a
minimum, it leads to better and more interesting
conversations. And sometimes it can lead to powerful
connections and business opportunities. Don’t let a
misguided sense of propriety keep you from leveraging such
a valua ble tool. Find a friend who’s equally game, plan out
the points you’d like each other to highlight (my new book,
his new pr omotion), and start hitting the cir cuit.
What if you can’t ﬁnd a colleague who’s willing to cross-
promote? You might want to try Debra Feldman. She started

--- PAGE 182 ---
her business, JobWhiz, in 2000 in order to help job seekers
make career connections (she never promises that they’ll
ﬁnd a job) for fees ranging from several thousand dollars up
to $50,000, depending how labyrinthine their desir ed
companies are to penetrate. Some clients simply don’t have
a lot of contacts, Feldman  notes, because “their job is not to
be a network er—it’s a secondary part of their job.” Others
aren’t sure of the best way to mark et or position themselves
to prospective employers, and still others turn shy at the
ﬁrst r oadblock or sign of r ejection.
Feldman has no qualm s aggressively promoting her
clients: “I don’t let any lead go. I always ask for the order,
and if the contact is not interested, I’ll almost always be
able to get a referral. Wher eas most people are really shy
about asking for more help after they’ve been shot down,
once I get a contact on the phone, I promote my client as
someone they need to meet—not as a job candidate, but
just giving them reasons to be intrigued. I’ll cite a success
story the person could relate to, or I’d tell them a personal
experience I’ve had with that person that shows they’r e an
outstanding individual . . . I have the patience to make it
right.”
But perhaps the most important advantage Feldman
brings to her clients is the fact that someone besides them
is making the sale. “There’s an ascribed status to having
another person involved in the transaction,” she says. So
whether you end up hiring a professional such as Debra
Feldman to sing your praises or simply work out a deal with
your friend, cultivating your own wingman can help break
through the clutter and ensure the right people hear about
your new brand.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 183 ---
Go Where the Action Is
As you’r e reintroducing your brand, you’ll want to think
strategically about your “unveiling.” How can you grab
people’s attention and get them to take notice of your new
identity? The last thing you want after investing so much
time and energy into your rebranding is for people not to
notice. Brainstor m about what aﬃliations or signs would be
most powerful and meaningful to your target audience. Are
there project s you can get involved with that will showcase
your new interests and abilities or help you develop them?
Organizational opportunit ies you can leverage (ﬁlling in for
your boss while he’s on paternity leave, transfer ring to the
new oﬃce in China, or getting placed on a major client
account)?
In general, you want to try to go wher e the action is—
headquarters rather than ﬁeld oﬃces, departments that
contr ol budgets and decisions, or, simply, where your
bosses are paying the most attention. During the 2004
presidential race, I work ed for Howar d Dean. That tur ned out
to be a signiﬁcant career advantage, since his campaign
unexpectedly caught ﬁre and dominated the headlines. But
the people who beneﬁted the most professionally were the
folks who headed up our digital team, because blogs and
social networking wer e new, se xy, and innovative.
The story line about the genesis of an “e-campaign ” was
irresistible to the media, which raised the proﬁle of
everyone involved in the eﬀort and ensur ed it would be
management’s top priority . (I remember workin g late at
night, waiting to consult with our internet-minded campaign
manager, Joe Trippi, about an important statement to the
press, while  he repeatedly waved me oﬀ—“co me back
later!”—in order to spen d more time working on a blog
post.) Dean tech staﬀers formed several prominent online

--- PAGE 184 ---
consulting ﬁrms after the campaign and, even as twenty -
somethings, were able to land blue-chip clients on the
strength of the “Dean Internet” brand. Working on a
signatur e initiative can serve as powerful shorthand for your
mastery : if you can make it there, you can make it
anywher e.
But what if you don’t work for a prominent company or
can’t get onto the most desirable projects? (After all,
competition can be tough for the most coveted spots.)
Pfeﬀer, the Stanfor d business school professor, has good
news for you. You can make a dramatic and visible impact
even if you’r e the low man on the totem pole by identif ying
the opportunities you do have, but which most people
overlook.
“A lot of routine, mundane tasks that most people
wouldn’t want to do actually bring you into contact with
senior people in the organization,” he says. “Often, small
but important things aren’t getting done—so when you do
them, people will say, ‘W ow, you took the initiative; that was
very helpful.’ And that will make people more familiar with
you and your competencies and capabilities, and you’ll build
a much better image.”
That approach work ed for Heather, the transpo rtation
engineer, who cemented her relationship with the powerful
leaders of her “women in transportation ” comm ittee by
volunteering to serve as secretary . “I think I was always
willing to take on the dirty work, the leg work,” she recalls,
while senior committee members were more interested in
big-pictur e planning and networking. “As secretary, there
wasn’t a whole lot of glory, and there was a lot of work
associated with it, like organizing logistics for meetings, but
it gave  me access to the inside scoop of how things happen
—conversations that don’t happen in public.” She made
herself indispensable while gaining an inside perspective
that few others had.

--- PAGE 185 ---
Similarly, if you contr ol resour ces of any kind, you can ﬁnd
a way to leverage them. Money is the obvious one. (Though,
of course, you have to be mindful of both laws and
propriety, as Massachuset ts State Treasur er Tim Cahill found
out when his oﬃce launched a $1.65 million advertising blitz
for the Massachusetts L ottery, praising how well it was run—
by him—just as he was running for gover nor. The state’s
attor ney general was not amused.)
But information is another powerful resour ce. In the days
befor e the internet was widespr ead, I work ed for a
newspaper that, astonishing as it now sounds, only had two
internet-equipped compu ters. The reporters had to share
them, and we’d hop on when we needed to look something
up, and hop oﬀ (and back to our own, ancient computers)
when it was time to do word processing. I had one colleague
who would spend as much time as possible online and,
when he’d come across a nugget, would scream it out
across the newsr oom and run in to tell our editor . She was
thrilled and quite clearly consider ed him the best reporter
on staﬀ. Information was the currency of the newsr oom, and
he deliver ed.
Your job, then, is to ﬁgure out what currency you can
traﬃc in, that matters to the people you need to inﬂuence.
The information problem these days is diﬀer ent; there’s
simply too much of it to digest. So instead of racing across
the newsr oom to deliver an update, your competitive
advantage will likely be in curating information —ﬁnding
interesting intelligence that’s been overlook ed, or
combining pieces of data and ﬁnding meaning in them.
Whether it’s creating a blog or e-newsletter that positions
you as an informational hub, organizing a speak er series, or
spear heading a cross-departmental initiative in your
company, there are ways you can make connections, gain
contr ol of resour ces, and achieve visibility and prominence,

--- PAGE 186 ---
even if you aren’t starting from what others would recognize
as an obvious base of power .
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 187 ---
Leverage Symbolic Actions
One of the most important ways you can cement your
personal brand and give it real meaning is to be on the
lookout for symbolic opportunities. At the critical moment,
are you stand ing up for what you say you believe? That was
the question facing hospitality entr epreneur Chip Conley .
More than two decades ago, when he was only twenty -six,
Conley purchased a rundown motel in a seedy part of San
Francisco and launch ed his company, which he
optimistically called Joie de Vivre. But despite its unlikely
beginnings, he eventually grew it to become the second-
largest boutique hotel chain in the United State s. In the
process, he developed the cornerstone of his management
philosophy, which focused on creating an envir onment that
allowed employees to feel comfortable and be themselves.
It’s a great sentiment. But to accomplish it, Conley decided
he had to be the pacesetter . “If I can be honest, vulnerable,
and authenti c in my way of presenting myself inside my
company and outside,” he told me, “that’s a helpful tool for
others to understand that everybody goes through diﬃcult
times . . . The more we create a divide between the public
image and the private reality, the more we create
dysfunction.”
He started by being open about his sexuality . “For gay
men, it’s an odd place in many corporations because the
stereotype is they’r e weak and not competitive,” he says.
But he decided to use his identity as a source of strength.
“Way before it was fashionable to be more emotionally open
and empathetic as a senior executive, I’ve been doing it—
partly because if you’r e gay or lesbian, you have to ﬁgure
out how to walk into a room and make yourself comfortable
in an envir onment wher e you feel like you’r e diﬀer ent. That

--- PAGE 188 ---
helps you be empathetic to other people, to understand how
it feels to be the other .”
Conley also took the opportunity to stand up for self-
expression in a very public way. After attending the Burning
Man Festival one year (the popular, and sometimes wild,
arts festival in the Nevada desert), he posted shirtless
pictur es of himself on Facebook wearing a sarong and a
tutu. It didn’t occur to him the pictur es would be a big deal.
They weren’t obscene or even risqué, but they also didn’t
confor m to the typical CEO image. Some senior members of
his staﬀ advised him to tak e them down. He said no .
“To take my pictur es down in some ways is saying there’s
something wrong with me, that I should feel ashamed of
what I did—a nd I don’t,” he told me. “Our mission statement
is creating the opportunit y to celebrate the joy of life, and
that’s what we were doing there.” When a journalist heard
the story and asked him to write a blog post about the
contr oversy, it spark ed worldwide attention. (He says the
reaction was 80 percent positive, 20 percent negative.) “I
just got to a place where I realized it was one more
opportunity to be authentic in life. A lot of people said, ‘We
really appr eciate the fact that you ar e who you ar e.’ ”
He believes that experience, and his overall emphasis on
a culture of openness, pays dividends for Joie de Vivre.
“Being authentic and vulnerable helps me, and it helps
others be vulnerable with me,” he says. “If you think your
boss is above emotions, above having any diﬃcult times . . .
then that’s going to make you feel like that’s what you’r e
going to have to be yourself . And if they feel like ‘I can’t do
that,’  it diminishes their ability to live up to their potential.”1
Lots of companies pay lip service to the importance of
“self-actualized employees” or an emotionally open
envir onment. But Conley’s experience shows the
importance of bold, memorable gestur es. It’s why CEOs who

--- PAGE 189 ---
are intent on creating change so often do things like rip out
executive washr ooms or sell oﬀ the company’s art
collection. In a multibillion-dollar corporation, one marble
bathr oom or Andy Warhol print isn’t going to make much
diﬀer ence. But big, attention-grabbing symbols will stick in
people’s mem ory and inﬂuence their overall perceptions. A
well-chosen gestur e can come to deﬁne your entire brand,
just as Conley’s transpar ency came to embody Joie de V ivre.
As you ﬁght, amid the bustle of everyday life, for your
reinvention to be recognized, you want to choose the
moments of greatest tactical advantage. You want to ensur e
your new identity is noticed. Maybe that means cultivating
the right advocates and validators. Maybe it means ensuring
you land on the right project team, or ﬁnding a hidden path
to informatio n or clout. It may even mean, like Chip Conley,
realizing when your actions in a given moment will speak
volumes about who you are and want to be. Most
importantly, it means understanding that you can’t simply
tell others once about your new identity and assume
they’ve now got it. Instead, your reinvention is an ongoing
process and an ongoing opportunity to demonstrate who
you ar e and what you can do best.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 190 ---
REMEMBER:
    Status often transfers between domains. If you’ve
built up a reputation in one ﬁeld, you may be able to
leverage it in your new areas of interest (as seen with
sports stars or ﬁnancie rs becoming politicians, or
Hollywood stars becoming humanitarians).
    Think about unspok en ways to introduce your new
brand and exude credibility . You can display diplomas or
other awar ds in your oﬃce, send introductory e-mails
befor e meeting someone citing your experience with a
given topic, or use your e-mail signatur e ﬁle to convey
important aﬃliations.
    Understand that the impression you’r e making may
be diﬀer ent than what you think. Use trusted colleagues
as a sounding board, because what matters is the
message others are getting, not what you think you’r e
conveying. A djust accor dingly .
    Making a pact with a colleague to talk each other up
can be an important way to generate third-party
validation for your new brand.
    Go wher e the action is. When in doubt, migrate to
the parts of your company that contr ol money,
resour ces, or your leader ’s attention; you’ll get noticed
faster .
    Walk the talk. If you claim transpar ency and
openness matters to you, be willing to share your
unvar nished r eality .
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 191 ---
CHAPTER 10
Prove Your Worth
I’ve always been impressed with web or graphic designers.
When they were job hunting, they could simply whip out
their portfolio  and show potential employers clear, concr ete
examples of their work. If the company liked the logos or
websites or sample reports they saw befor e them, it was a
go. But for most knowledge work ers, the task was harder.
How could you possibly demonstrate to an outsider what
you’r e capable of? But with the internet, that’s changed.
Because there is zero cost to publishing your intellectual
property, there is also zero excuse for not doing it. In this
chapter, we’ll talk about:
 
Building your portfolio
How to ﬁnd the right medium for you
Creating online r elationships and how you can tur n them
into r eal-world connections
How to k eep social media fr om taking over your life
Building your r eputation in the r eal world
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 192 ---
Building Your Portfolio
Developing your own content—that is, intellectual property
—is a powe rful tool for anyone. In fact, in a crowded
mark etplace wher e you’r e working overtime to establish
your new brand, it’s an essential strategy to showcase your
knowledge and opinions, connect with interested parties
(who are consuming your material), and establish an expert
reputation (because the people who get cited and lead any
industry’s discourse are the ones who have a clearly stated,
written philos ophy). It’s also the best way to overcome any
objections you might face as a “brand reinventer .” Your
former colleagues may wonder how an oceanographer can
become an investment bank er, or how a tennis instructor
can become a sales vice president, or how an engineer can
become the head of human resour ces. This is your chance
to let people  judge you based on the quality of the material
you pr oduce, not on your past history or cr edentials.
After all, when someone comes to your website, he’ll be
regaled with compelling, thoughtful content that will dispel
any doubts. Further more, you’ll be e-mailing him relevant
links (“Jeremy, I remember you were talking about your
challenges with your sales team last month; here’s a post I
wrote that might be of interest”). You’ll also be blitzing out
your content  via social media channels so that when anyone
wonders what you’r e up to, the clear answer is “shaking up
your new ﬁeld.”
A similar kind of content-fueled reinvention propelled
Brian Clark (no relation) into an inﬂuential new career. Clark
started the hugely popular website Copyblogger,  which
explains how to improve your website, and the sales that
come from it, by creating better and more interesting
content. Copyblogger  has becom e a go-to tool for

--- PAGE 193 ---
businesses and individu als seeking to turbocha rge their
online presence; Advertising Age ranked it third on its
Power150 list of the most inﬂuential mark eting blogs, and
the Guar dian named it one of the world’s ﬁfty most powerful
blogs—period. So it makes perfect sense that it was started
by . . . a lawyer? “I hated practicing law,” Clark explained in
an online interview, “and I was fascinated by the internet.
The transition was extreme I suppose, but I always had a
thing for writing, so I started creating online conte nt over a
decade ago . Now it’s just part of me.”1
His words are telling. Today, no one doubts Brian Clark’s
knowledge of online mark eting. But ﬂash back to a decade
ago: wouldn’t you be slightly suspicious taking advice from
a random lawyer? So Clark walked the rebranding  talk. He
didn’t immediately jump from the courtr oom to pontiﬁcating
about copywriting technique. Instead, he took time to learn
and practice the skills he needed. He became a serial
entrepreneur, building three oﬄine busines ses, but
promoting them using the internet. In the process, he
gained an understanding of what content most interested
customers and how he should e xpress it.
By the time he launched Copyblogger  in 2006, Clark knew
what would get people to click, and he’s built a rabid
following with a steady stream of posts on topics that
obsess every online mark eter, from “How to Get More
Subscribers for Your Email List” to “How to Write Headlines
That Work.” Clark gained  the necessary skills and built a
narrative for himself (lawyer to entrepreneur to online
mark eting expert). But most importantly, he built a portfolio
for other people to see. Thanks to his Copyblogger  posts,
he’s provided insight and value to others, while
simultaneously mark eting  himself and his products to a
swarm of eager customers.

--- PAGE 194 ---
If you’r e less tech-savvy, you may wonder about the
feasibility of opting out of online branding in favor of more
traditional methods. I’d say it’s mandatory to pursue both
channels; eschewing the online world can have serious
unintended consequences. I once consulted for a client
hiring a new senior executive, and the leading candidate
was a man in his ﬁfties who had work ed for a number of
years at a small ﬁrm. Amazingly, he had left so little of an
online paper trail, my client became extremely concer ned
he was somehow faking his credentials and was only
reassur ed af ter extensive conversations with his r eferences.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 195 ---
Finding Your Medium
Blogging is one of the best ways to start getting your
intellectual property out into the wider world. It’s virtually
free (you can pay for your domain name and hosting fees
with Starbucks money) and doesn’t requir e any fancy
equipment or training; if you’r e pressed for time, you can
pump out your posts at an airport lounge or on the
commuter rail. But, admittedly, it’s not the answer for
everyone. Brian Clark always loved to write, and some of
the best bloggers (lik e Andr ew Sullivan, who runs “The Dish”
for the Daily Beast ) started life as journalist s and are used
to pumping out copy on deadline. But what if you’r e not
much of a writer? In that case, you should make like Gary
Vayner chuk, an entrepreneur who turned his family’s liquor
store into an online empir e through video blogging.
Vayner chuk thought about creating a traditional blog, but
writing wasn’t his thing. If you’r e making a serious
commitment to building your brand—and blogging, which
requir es regular and consistent updates, certainly qualiﬁes—
you don’t want to choose a medium that ﬁlls you with
dread, because you’r e going to fall oﬀ the wagon pretty
quickly . After all, who wants to wake up every morning
panick ed about what to write that day? A blank screen can
be pretty horrifying if writing doesn’t come naturally . Just as
ﬁtness coaches advise you to pick an exercise you enjoy (I
know I’ll make it to the gym more often to play squash than
if I’m forced onto a treadmill), you should ﬁnd a way to
express yourself that’s fun and easy for you. In other words,
play to your str engths.
That’s what Vayner chuk  did in creating Winelibrary .tv.
He’s a passionate, charismatic speak er, which became a
competitive advantage in the often-snooty wine world. He
leveraged his natural talent and built up a following  through

--- PAGE 196 ---
consistency and hard work, posting a thousand daily web
episodes until he r etired the pr ogram in 2011.
Video blogging is an especially useful tool in building your
brand through search engine optimization (i.e., scoring
better in online search results). In 2006, Google purchased
YouTube and, for obvious reasons, has been excited to
promote video ever since. And now that broadband access
is widely available, it’s clear that online video is on a growth
trajectory, with internet streaming eating the lunch of video
rental chains like Blockbuster . To that end, Forrester
Resear ch discover ed in 2009 that Google prioritized video
over traditional text-based web pages—dramaticall y. In fact,
videos were ﬁfty-three times  more likely to make it to the
front page of a Google search.2 So if you’r e looking to
diﬀer entiate yourself and build a powerful brand on your
chosen topic, making a lot of videos is a good start.
Fortunately, price is no longer a barrier. Most smartphones
these days have high-deﬁnition video capabilities, e xtremely
convenient if you want to ﬁlm something interesting on the
ﬂy. For a sustained video series, however, you may want to
invest in two items that will create a much better viewer
experience. The ﬁrst is a tripod (you can even purchase one
speciﬁcally for your smartphone). Viewers can take a little
shaking, especially if you’r e only producing a short snippet.
But if you’r e planning an extended sit-down, you want to
make it clear you’r e not recreating the Blair Witch Project .
Buy a tripod  that will hold the camera in place, give your
arms a rest, and ensur e a steady pictur e. The second is an
external microphone (wireless ones are sometimes
available, depending what kind of video came ra you’r e
using). The biggest “miss” of online videos is poor sound
quality, which renders some—no matter how interesting
their content—virtually unwatchable. You’ll want to ensur e
people can hear what you or your interviewees are saying,
and an e xternal mic guarantees crisp sound.

--- PAGE 197 ---
Another worthy option for those who may not feel
comfortable in front of a camera is to create a podcast
series, which also has minimal start-up costs. You can
certainly go all out and rent a recording studio if technical
quality is essential to you. (One friend of mine runs a
business creating podcasts for high-end musical groups who
have to sound perfect.) But most of us won’t requir e that
level of investment. Three of my favorite techniques are
recording a telephone interview with an interestin g expert;
monologuing into an external mic plugged into my
computer; or simply recording one of my speec hes to a
crowd, such as a Chamber of Commer ce or professional
association. You can then edit the digital ﬁles using free
software and put it online. To increase your visibility and
make it easier for listeners to download, you can also make
sure your podcasts ar e available via iT unes.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 198 ---
Your Multimedia Mix
If you’r e feeling especially creative, you can also try out a
variety of multimedia options. That’s been the approach of
Dave Cutler, the aspiring mark eter who got a mini-MBA at
Rutgers and broadcast his job search via social media,
winning coverage from the Boston Globe  and local aﬃliates
of Fox News and NPR for his use of such innovative
techniques. “Ther e’s been a huge shift and the truth is,
prospective employers are going to vet you through social
media channels, whether you promote them or not,” says
Cutler . “It deﬁnitely behooves a job seeker to proactively
enhance their proﬁle through those channels so they reﬂect
well on you. Plus, it’s a way to demonstrate your knowledge,
your cr eativity, and to add a little mor e personality .”
Among his unique strategies, Cutler created his own
smartphone app, which aggregates his blog, tweets, and
videos—a treasur e trove of information for any prospective
employer . He also developed a “Dave Cutler’s job search”
venue on Foursquar e, the location-based social networking
site, that he checks into regularly . Because Foursquar e
focuses primarily on checking in to physical locations such
as bars or restaurants, highlighting his job search is an
intriguing surprise. “It’s a channel that’s a little quieter than
Twitter,” he says, so his message stands out. “I’ve had folks
I’m connecte d to on Foursquar e see it, and it’s created
potential leads.”
Finally, he created video résumés that showcase his skills
and personality . “The more you can show prospective
employers who you are and demonstrate knowledge of the
industry you want to work in, the better,” he says. “They
want to make sure it’s an organizational ﬁt and that your
personality will ﬁt in.” He’s noticed the videos can be an
icebr eaker, because employers have more information

--- PAGE 199 ---
about him going in: “Last week I had a phone interview, and
the interviewer said she watched my video and saw I have
two little boys and a wife and a dog. She said, ‘If you have a
Little Leagu e game you need to go to, we’re very
understanding of that as long as you get your work done.’”
As Dave’s experience shows, creating good content and
ﬁnding innovative ways to share it is still so unusual, it’s a
clear competitive advantage.3
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 200 ---
Building Relationships Online
Another goal you can reach through creating content is
networking and building relationships in your ﬁeld. You can
often interview top think ers for your blog or podcast. It can
be a challenge to break through the gatek eepers in
celebrity -heavy ﬁelds like entertainment or sports, but
generally speaking, if your industry’s heavyweights aren’t
familiar to the general public, they’r e often accessible.
That’s especially true if they’r e in the midst of promoting
a book (their publisher doesn’t want them to turn down a
single opport unity to push sales) or, conversely, if it’s a few
years after the release of their best seller (because the
number of media requests will have dropped precipitously).
Interviews with thought leaders, insightful review s of their
books, or references to them in your work position you as a
peer and someone worth getting to know .
A while back, I wrote a piece for the Huﬃngton Post on
“Why Your Personal Brand Shouldn’t Be Your Corporate
Brand.” Toward the end of the article, I tossed out an
example of strong personal branding from the ultimate
productivity guru: “I can read Getting Things Done  like
everyone else,” I wrote, “but I really want David Allen to
come to my oﬃce and set up the system for me.” Imagine
my surprise when, a day or two later, David Allen himself e-
mailed me his thanks. We’ve since phoned, e-mailed, and
continue to keep in touch. More than you might imagine,
people notice what you write, and creating good content
sets you apart and gives people a r eason to r each out.
So start making your list: who do you want to connect
with in your industry? If you’re a designer, for instance, how
can you make friends with the dean of Stanfor d University’s
much- vaunted Institute of Design (aka “the d.school”) or the
head of IDEO? Read up on their past books and articles so

--- PAGE 201 ---
you can reference them, note when they’r e releasing new
works, and contact the publisher to request a review copy.
And when you feel ready, request an interview, especially
when they’r e on a publicity tour, and especially if they’ll be
in your city (in-person interviews obviously make a bigger
impression in terms of relationship building). In a world of
Cliﬀ Notes and summarie s typed up by interns, they’ll be
impressed you’ve read their work and have a thoughtful
array of questions.
Finally, creating content helps you introduce yourself to
new audiences. Posting content to your own blog is
worthwhile, but it can be hard to attract a readership (most
blogs are read by your mom, your best friend, and two
people in Pakistan). Especially if you’r e focusing on a niche
business topic, and unles s you plan to plan to video blog in
a bikini, your numbers are likely to be low. So how do you
bolster your readership and become known outside your
current circles? Two winning strategies are oﬀering to guest-
post on others’ blogs and aﬃliating with well-known media
outlets.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 202 ---
Finding Y our Audience
If you’ve done enough resear ch, you’r e probably familiar
with the leading lights of your industry . Whose name is on
everyone’s lips? Who sets the tenor of the debate? Whose
posts get people talking? Odds are, they too are under
pressur e to create a steady stream of interesting,
provocative content, but, faced with a rowdy band of
opinionated readers, their stress level is probab ly much
higher . So come to their rescue. Familiarize yourself with
their blog. See how long their average post is, and identif y
the topics that seem to galvanize their readers. Then reach
out with an e-mail pitch and oﬀer to help. Ramit Sethi,
author of the best-selling I Will Teach You to Be Rich, is a
huge advoca te of guest- posting, noting in one article that
his writing for Tim Ferriss’s 4-Hour Workweek  blog and the
popular Get Rich Slowly  blog result ed in “hundr eds of
thousands of new readers, tens of thousands of new email
subscribers, and thousands of books sold.”
Sethi, who also accepts guest posts on his own blog,
shares the following tips, which are applicable for almost
any blog you’d lik e to crack into:
 
Send a short, bullet-pointed list of ideas, which allows
him to pick the topic most r elevant to his r eaders.
Include a link to writing samples (for this, you must
already have your own blog), so he can make sure your
literary chops ar e in or der.
Ensur e your post is full of “resear ch, charts, data, and
expert quotes, not your opinion.” Says Sethi, “It’s easy
to write what you think. It’s much harder to produce
data that backs up an ar gument.”
Make it easy for him by formatting your post correctly
for his blog so it can be pasted in without additional

--- PAGE 203 ---
work.4
Next, you’ll want to explor e the possibility of blogging or
writing articles for prominent media outlets. Readers may
not come to top business websites looking for you, but if
they enjoy an article of yours they encounter, they’r e likely
to visit your website, start following you on Twitter, or
otherwise engage. Make a list of the publications that
matter in your industry, see which ones featur e pieces by
outside contributors, and hone your pitch. (Indus try trade
groups are also frequently hungry for blog and newsletter
oﬀerings, and are a prime way to reach your target
audience.) You’ll have to be persistent—editors are usually
overwhelmed by would-be contributors—but the exposur e is
worth the eﬀort.
This strateg y work ed for Kathleen Kelley Reardon, a
management professor at the University of Souther n
Califor nia’s Marshall School of Business. Early in her career,
she faced a challenge. Her expertise in business
communication wasn’t really respected by her traditional,
data- obsessed colleague s who would deter mine whether
she’d get tenur e.
“I published in leading communication journals,” she
wrote in her book It’s All Politics: Winning in a World Wher e
Hard Work and Talent Aren’t Enough,  “but they were not the
ones many business professors read . . . Yet insisting that
journals in my ﬁeld were just as good as those respected by
ﬁnance professors or complaining that promotion criteria
were skewed and unfair  would not have helped. What I
needed to do was raise my value to the Marshall School.” So
she embark ed on a campaign to break into Harvar d
Business Review  and other top business journals her
colleagues valued, and to write books that received
signiﬁcant publicity . Her strategy work ed and, despite her

--- PAGE 204 ---
colleagues’ initial reluctance, she became a tenur ed
professor .
Try This
 
Create a list of potential blog topics and keep it updated
as new ideas occur to you. You can start your list by
thinking about the questions people most often ask you
about your ﬁeld, the impact of new technology, the
things most people don’t understand or get wrong about
your ﬁeld, success secrets you’ve observed in your
industry, and so on.
Make a list of at least a half-dozen publications that
matter in your industry . Go online and look up the name
and address of their online editor . Make a note in your
calendar to contact them in three months, after you’ve
built up a good set of clips from your own blog, to
approach them with a pitch.
Schedule your social media. Spend a couple of week end
days pounding out content, so you have a backlog.
Schedule your posts to load at predeter mined intervals
to take the pressur e oﬀ; if you get slammed at work and
miss a week or two, you have enough material to keep
you cover ed.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 205 ---
How to Keep Social Media from
Taking Over Your Life
When I give talks, one of the most frequent questions from
aspiring brand builders relates to the frequency of posting.
How much is enough? And how can you keep social media
from taking over your life? (It would certainly be easy to
spend every waking minute “liking” things on Facebook and
monitoring the endless ﬂow of tweets.) Gary Vaynerchuk
became famous for his dedication to responding to every
fan e-mail; his ﬁrst book, Crush It!, attributes his success to
staying up all hours of the night writing comments on
people’s blogs, cross-pos ting his videos everywher e on the
web (not just on popular sites like YouTube), and literally
building his fan base one person at a time. So do you have
to give up your life to the ﬂickering blue light? Not
necessarily .
Tim Ferriss certainly doesn’t. In fact, he posts on his
extremely popular blog once or twice a week at best; often
there’s nearly a two-week delay . Why? He believes posting
less frequently actually helps his blog. “It allow comments
to accumulate,” he explained in an interview with the
website ProBlogger,  “which reinfor ces the perception that
your blog is popular . It also oﬀers you the breathing room to
focus on quality, which creates the popula rity and
stickiness. People have a lot of crap information being
forced upon them, so I only want to add a good dash of fun
and educatio n when I have something worthy to say . . .
Last but not least, it takes a while for posts to propagate
through the web, and most people simply track back to your
most recent post, so leaving a post up for a few days in pole
position has been an important tactic for me.”5

--- PAGE 206 ---
Mark eting guru Seth Godin posts seven days a week, but
not because he thinks that’s a magic number . Rather, he
told Advertising Age, “I ﬁnd that I have about six bloggable
ideas a day. I also ﬁnd that writing twice as long a post
doesn’t increase communication, it usually decreases it. And
ﬁnally, I found that people get antsy if there are unread
posts in their queue. Hence, the compr omise on daily.”6 As
both Ferriss and Godin indicate, you should only post as
frequently as you have high-quality material to share. My
general advice to clients is that they should post often
enough to keep people coming back (so their blog doesn’t
appear aban doned), but not so much that it becomes an
unbearable chore—for you or your readers. Generally, that
means picking a frequency somewher e between once a day
(at the high end) and twice a month (at the low end), with
most people clustering ar ound one to thr ee times per week.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 207 ---
Scheduling Y our W ay to Sanity
The other strategy that’s saved me from madness is
scheduling tweets in advance using a service like TweetDeck
or Hootsuite. Some might argue that scheduling tweets is
anathema to Twitter’s ethos of real-time interaction—diving
into the stream and retweeting interesting stories, direct
messaging your contacts, interacting with fans, and
responding to the news of the day. That’s nice to do
sometimes to keep things lively, and it’s an important
element if you choose to make social media ubiquity your
exclusive marketing strategy, as Vayner chuk did. But it’s
just not practical for most people all the time. Anyone who
reads produc tivity books knows that Twitter is a black hole
that can easily suck you into its vorte x, so you must have a
plan.
As with blogging, I encourage my clients to have a
baseline presence on Twitter, which shows that you’r e
engaged and keeping up with the times. But unless it’s so
much fun for you that it becomes your hobby of choice, you
should seek to minimize your time spent on it. Shoot for one
to two posts per weekday and you’ll look perfectly
respectable; even more is better, but there can be too much
of a good thing: the people who blast things out ﬁve
hundr ed times a day are impressive but also risk annoying
the daylights out of their followers. Here are the steps to a
painless T witter pr esence:
 
Block out an afternoon on your calendar to brainstor m a
list of tweets (i.e., one- to two-sentence nuggets of
wisdom). I can often bang out a hundr ed to two hundr ed
in a couple of hours. These should be tips, insights, or
recommendations that establish your expertise in your
chosen ﬁeld (not the oft-mock ed “Just bought my Egg

--- PAGE 208 ---
McMuﬃn ”–type posts). Some examples from my Twitter
feed—which focuses on mark eting, branding, and
business strategy—include:
– How to create buzz? Think about mark eting as you
design a pr oduct, not af ter.
– Have you had coﬀee with your local reporter? If not,
invite them today .
– Can everyone in your organization clearly state your
mission? T est them.
Set up your scheduling account and schedule your posts
a month in advance, so you don’t need to worry about
what you should write on any given day. (It’s hard to
think of a worse use of your time than stressin g out
about what 140-character post you’r e going to send on
a given day when you’r e facing meetings, dead lines,
and actual work.)
Once a day, for ﬁve minutes, visit your scheduling
account to see if you need to respond to any messages.
You can also scan the feed of the folks you’r e following
(ideally, thought leaders you’d like to emulate and
connect with in your ﬁeld) and retweet interesting
material. (Keep retweetin g enough and you’r e likely to
get on their radar screen, especially if they’r e not yet in
the superstar category, with hundr eds of thousan ds of
followers. Along these lines, a nice Twitter tradition is
“Follow Friday,” in which you give a shout- out each
week to Twitter feeds you think are particularly worth
recommending to others.) You can also use this daily
check-in to update your queue of posts and add in links
to new blog posts you’v e written. If you ﬁnd yourself
losing track of time and can’t keep to the ﬁve-m inute
limit, stick to visiting your scheduling account three
times a week; waiting a day to respond to a message
usually won’t kill you.7

--- PAGE 209 ---
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 210 ---
Capture That Data!
The other important thing  to consider in ensuring that social
media doesn’t take over your life is that you need a system
for capturing ideas so that when Forbes  asks you to write a
guest post, you’r e not banging your head against a wall
trying to come up with content. Here are some of my
strategies:
 
Capturing ideas in my smartphone. If you’r e paying
attention, just living your life will give you plenty of
ideas. During  a fruitless quest to buy socks in midtown
Manhattan, I dreamed up an idea for a post on “the
limits of serendipity”—that is, sometimes you want to
browse around, wander, and be exposed to new things .
. . and other times you just want to buy your socks, so
you need to set up systems that allow you to be
eﬃcient when you need to. I probably would have
forgotten all about it once my blood pressur e went down
and my rage at Macy’s bizar re store layout subsided.
But instead, thanks to a note I recorded on my phone, I
can now channel it into a blog masterwork. (Appar ently,
I’m not the only one who ﬁles ideas on an iPhone ; The
New Yorker reports pop singer Taylor Swift likes to
captur e melodies as voice memos.)
Keeping an idea ﬁle. Keeping ideas in your phone or
calendar is great for a while, but eventually you’ll lose
track. That’s why, every few weeks, I transfer my new
ideas into a master ﬁle called “Blog Topics.” It now
clocks in at forty-seven pages and will likely provide
enough ideas to k eep me writing into r etirement.
Start with the title. Still having trouble coming up with a
winning idea? Starting with the title can often help you

--- PAGE 211 ---
structur e your post and ensur e you stay on topic. Brian
Clark of Copyblogger  suggests “The Cosmo Headline
Technique for Blogging Inspiration.” Pick up a copy of
Cosmo —which has perfected the art of irresistible
headlines—and adapt them for your purposes. “The 22
Best Relationship Tips Ever” becomes, in Clark’s telling,
“My 22 Best Design Tips Ever.” Meanwhile, “Guys Spill:
White Lies They Tell Women All the Time” morphs into
“Realtors Revealed: The Little White Lies We Tell Clients
(And How to Stop).”
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 212 ---
Building Your Reputation in the Real
World
Curating your online presence is extremely important
because more people are going to follow your life and
career developments online than in person (you may have a
thousand Facebook friends, but you’r e never going to have
time to have coﬀee with each of them and explain your new
career aspira tions). Sometimes that online light touch is
ﬁne; after all, as Stanfor d sociologist Mark Granovetter
famously discover ed in his study of the “strength of weak
ties” (popularized by The Tipping Point), more people ﬁnd
jobs through  acquaintan ces than friends, becaus e casual
connections can plug them into networks and information
they wouldn’t otherwise have access to. But to ensur e your
new brand spreads widely and deeply, you can’t rely on
online methods alone.
So what steps can you take to demonstrate your chops in
real life? One of the best, suggests the consulting expert
Alan Weiss, is to get involved with your ﬁeld’s professional
association. It helps you make connections with other
practitioners (always good for referrals, in case they can’t
handle a particular assignment) and ensur es you’r e staying
on top of the latest think ing and best practices. But even
more than that, says Weiss, it provides an opportunity to
build visibility among your peers and beyond. In the mid-
1990s, he agreed to serve as the president of the National
Speak ers Association’s New England chapter . “I thought I’d
do less business those years,” he told me, because with his
association commitment he’d have less time available to
seek out new clients. “But to my surprise, I did about
$250,000 more business.  The visibility naturally accrues to
you, and even though you don’t seek it out, people come to

--- PAGE 213 ---
you for interviews and advice. Your visibility grows and your
brand gr ows.”
The secret, which most people don’t realize, is that they
should aggressively seek out a leadership role. “My advice
to people today,” says Weiss, “is if you’r e going to join a
trade or professional association—any volunteer association
—it’s ‘in for a dime, in for a dollar .’ Take some kind of
leadership position, lead a committee, head a task force, be
an oﬃcer, but don’t just sit there week after week.” While
most of your peers are halfheartedly attending meetings or
trading business cards at the back of the room, you can
become a connector and power broker—knowing everyone,
and at the center of the action. Leading the group means
you not only have an excuse to talk to anyone, but they’r e
simultaneously seeking you out.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 214 ---
Start Y our Own Group
What if your trade associ ation or Chamber of Commer ce is
boring, hideb ound, or led by an impenetrable cabal from the
old boys’ network? Start your own. It takes more work and
entrepreneurial ambition to convince others to spend their
time on your start-up, but, if you can convince them the
networking and content value is suﬃcient, the payoﬀ is also
much greater . The World Economic Forum, which sets the
international business agenda each year with its January
confer ence in Davos, Switzerland, wasn’t created from on
high. A business schoo l professor from Genev a, Klaus
Schwab, got the idea and made it happen. Now he’s a lot
more powerful than most CEOs, whose companies pay tens
of thousands of dollars in membership fees to be part of the
club. (The forum’s annual budget now tops $100 million per
year.)
A smaller -scale, but still powerful, example is Chris
Brogan, a well-known blogger and coauthor of the best-
selling Trust Agents : Using the Web to Build Inﬂuenc e,
Improve Reputation, and Earn Trust. (You may also
remember him as Dave Cutler’s job search booster .) Brogan
didn’t start out with unusually grand connections or
credentials. In fact, he was a college dropout working as a
project manager at a telecom company : your average geek,
who took an early interest in blogging and podcasting.
Today, with hundr eds of millions of blogs, it’s harder to build
up an audience. But as an early and committed adopter,
Brogan built up a following for his regular posts, many of
which sought to explain the new social media phenomenon
and the best ways to leverage it. He also embraced the idea
of an online community and became tight with many other
bloggers (who, in linking to his posts, further ampliﬁed his
brand).

--- PAGE 215 ---
In 2006, when Brogan co-organized a gathering called
PodCamp Boston “wher e newbies and advanced  content
makers alike come to learn more about and share their
knowledge of podcasting, blogging, video blogging, social
media, and mor e,” it solidiﬁed his r eputation as a leader and
authority in these emer ging ﬁelds. And when the PodCamp
concept went viral and expanded to other cities like
Pittsbur gh, San Francisco, Atlanta, and Copenhagen within
less than three months of the original event, it exposed
literally thousands of other content producers to Brogan’s
ideas and philosophy (who could then blog and tweet about
it). Today, Brogan consults for Fortune  500 compan ies and
makes a healthy living as a professional speak er, bringing in
(as of late 2011) $22,000 a pop.8
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 216 ---
The Joy of Public Speaking
Which brings  us to another superb way to establish your
credentials in your new realm: public speaking. Giving talks
clearly isn’t for everyone; if the prospect makes you
shudder, it might be worth a few visits to Toastmasters to
overcome your anxiety, but you probably don’t want to
make it the cornerstone of your mark eting (why suﬀer?). But
if speaking is actually fun for you, then it represents the
best win-win possible.
First, it gives you an opportunity to interact with an entire
room full of prospective clients (or, at least, recommenders)
in an expert capacity . The biggest challenge for any
professional who traﬃcs in ideas is that it’s often hard for
potential clients to evaluate their merits. Are you a good
lawyer? I’m not sure; I can’t really evaluate that since I
haven’t been to law school. Are you a good mark eting
strategist? How can I possibly tell until I’ve already hired
you and see what you come up with? There’s a tremendous
fear of buyer’s remorse; after all, clients or potential
employers will be shelling out thousands of dollars (or more)
for an uncert ain outcome . But seeing you speak is a quick
way to alleviate those fears because they’r e able to see you
in actio n, interact with you in real time (via Q&A or chatting
with you af terwar d), and get a sense of what you’d be lik e to
work with. That’s something Twitter simply can’t provide, no
matter how witty your r epartee.
Second, your credibility is enhanced from the get-go by
the implicit endorsement of the host organization. The
Chamber of Commer ce or local Rotary or the Southwester n
Association of Cattle Ranchers wouldn’t bring you in to
address their members if they didn’t think you had
something worthwhile to say. So there’s a lower barrier for
the organization’s members to accept you as an expert

--- PAGE 217 ---
(and, in turn, to hire you for further speaking or consulting
services).
Third, speak ing provides you with an opportunity to
leverage your content. In addition to the people you’r e
reaching in the r oom that day, you also have the ability to:
 
Record your remarks. You can turn them into a podcast
or possibly a CD or download you can sell.
Attract media attention. You can invite the local
newspaper or TV station (local access television is often
desperate for good content to ﬁlm).
Provide addit ional content  to organization member s. You
can provide a white paper as a handout and oﬀer to let
the organization reprint it in its newsletter, which is how
I ended up being featur ed in such unlikely (but
excellent) venues as the newsletter for the New
Hampshir e Association of Chamber of Comm erce
Executives and QRCA Views,  the magazine of the
Qualitative R esear ch Consultants Association.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 218 ---
Getting Y ourself Book ed
In short, public speaking is a powerful, eﬃcient way to
mark et yours elf and your new brand (and, as with Brogan, if
your proﬁle becomes suﬃciently robust, you may even get
paid to do it). The obvious way to book speaking
engagements is to work with a professional speak ers’
bureau. Unfortunately, however, they primarily want to work
with celebrities or professionals whose brands are so well-
known that the speaki ng engagements practically sell
themselves. If you’r e just beginning to establish your new
brand, you’ll probably need to do the mark eting yourself . To
get some experience under your belt (and rack up
testimonials and perhaps sample video clips), start small
and local. Your Chamber of Commer ce and Rotary are
usually good bets; they often need speak ers and, because
they don’t pay, are more willing to take risks in booking new
talent.
Eventually, you’ll work up to speaking to regional or
national trade associatio ns: a target-rich envir onment for
clients or potential employers. To learn more about how to
break in, check out Alan Weiss’s excellent Money Talks and
Million Dollar Speaking,  and pick up a copy of Columbia
Books’s National Trade and Professional Associations
Directory  (or, even better, look for it at the library, because
it costs several hundr ed dollars). Writing an inquiry letter
citing your credentials and the amazingly relevant talk you
can give to their members can sometimes get you in the
door, but the very best bet is to drill down into your existing
clients, friends, and contacts. What associations and
organizations are they involved with? Who can they
introduce you to?

--- PAGE 219 ---
A “warm” lead is far more likely to result in a successful
booking, which is how I’ve ended up speaking at
confer ences such as the Association for Commuter
Transportation Internation al Confer ence (a client who was a
member suggested me) and the National Lesbian and Gay
Journalists Association International Convention (the brother
of a former colleague was that year’s program coordinator).
In short, if you enjoy public speaking, this is one of the best
ways to br oadcast your new brand and e xpertise widely .
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 220 ---
REMEMBER:
    Getting involved in social media really isn’t optional
anymor e. If you’r e reinventing yourself professionally,
you need to establish a powerful online identity that
demonstrates your expertise, and social media  is a
critical tool.
    The return on investment for social media isn’t
always appar ent. You may generate immediate sales
from a blog you wrote or tweet you sent, but it’s not
likely. Instead, the eﬀect is aggregate and builds over
time. It’s your calling car d, and that tak es time to build.
    It’s your pick whethe r your blog is text, video, or
audio (i.e., a podcast), or all of the above. The trick is to
ﬁnd a medium you’r e comfortable with and create
content consistently .
    Look at your online brand building as networking on
steroids. You have the ability to connect with prominent
people in your industry and potential clients  (by
interviewing them, writing blog posts that mention
them, commenting on their blogs, retweeting their
material, etc.) and to create content that draws them to
you.
    Leverage your content creation. Start with your own
blog, and then—once you’ve built up sample clips—
consider writing for other outlets (magazines’ websites,
the blogs of other popular writers) to increase your
audience r each.
    Social media can quickly become overwhelming. Use
online tools (such as Hootsuite or TweetDeck) to
schedule your posts in advance and respond to
messages at pr edeter mined times.

--- PAGE 221 ---
    Don’t forget that both online and oﬄine brand
building are necessary . Seek out a leadership role in
industry groups, begin public speaking, and consider
starting your own organization so you can raise your
proﬁle and become a connection hub.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 222 ---
CHAPTER 11
Keep It Going
I recently gave a talk at a leading business school, and
afterwar d a student sidled up to me with a question. “How
long,” he asked, “does it actually take to reinvent your
personal brand?” There’s no easy answer, of course. It
depends on the extent of your change and the depth of your
previous r eputation. (It’s a lot easier for a junior e xecutive to
rebrand himself as a team player than it would be for
someone like Larry Summers, the famously querulous
economist and for mer US T reasury Secr etary .)
Reinvention never happens overnight. Even if it’s possible
to wake up and be a diﬀer ent person, other peop le simply
won’t believe you until you demonstrate that change over
time. A quick change, followed by a reversion to past
behavior, looks like a manipulative feint, and that can
actually damage your reputation in the long run. But
reinvention also doesn’t have to be a thankless and eternal
slog. While it’s true that we “reinvent ourselves every day,”
in this book, I’m positing that you start at Point A (your
current brand) and, with the right planning and execution,
do eventually end up at Point B (how you want to be
perceived moving forwar d).
“You probably won’t be able to convince anyone you’ve
changed in less than three months,” I told the student. “For
relatively small changes, you can manage them in a few
months by consistently demonstrating your new behavior .

--- PAGE 223 ---
For larger ones—especially career shifts wher e you may
need to gain new skills or go back to school—it’ll take a few
years. It’s hard work, but it’s not a lifetime. You’re going to
be a few months or a few years older, anyway,  and you
might as well position yourself for the success you want.” So
how do you ensur e that you’re moving forwar d in the right
direction and keeping your brand momentum going? In this
chapter, we’ll talk about:
 
Why it’s essential to monitor your brand and make
adjustments wher e necessary
How to keep yourself from backsliding into your old
identity
Why you shouldn’t be afraid to r eevaluate
The importance of staying consistent and following your
path
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 224 ---
Monitor Your Brand
It’s the butt of jokes: the narcissist who sits at his computer,
endlessly Googling himself to see what comes up. “Oh, I
never do that,” some people aver. What a shame. Not only
is it a good idea to do an online inventory of yours elf, as we
suggested in chapter 2, but you’r e also going to want to
create a Google Alert for yourself, which will e-mail you
anytime an article or blog post mentions your name. There
are fancier and more expensive systems available to track
what’s being  said about you, but unless you’r e a celebrity
who’s constantly being assessed in the media, Google’s no-
cost alert system will do just ﬁne.
Most of the time, you may not get any hits at all. But in
the event that someone does mention you, it’s critically
important for you to know . That way, you can thank
someone for a kind mention or ﬂattering portrayal and
immediately correct any negative or incor rect information
befor e it has time to spread. Similarly, you’ll want to keep
an eye on Twitter . Using a service like Hootsuite or
TweetDeck, you can easily (and again, for free) track online
mentions and r espond in a timely fashion.
But trackin g online perceptions isn’t everything.
Sometimes, you need the curated perspective of real people
to help you make sense of the data. In the popular TV show
Mad Men,  set in the chic adverti sing world of the early
1960s, there’s a scene in which ad man Freddy is
suggesting concepts for Pond’s Cold Cream, which they’r e
trying to sell to younger women: How about Jessica Tandy as
a spokeswoman? How about Doris Day? Tallulah Bankhead?
He goes through a list of aging stars that leaves Peggy, a
young female exec, exasperated. Younger women don’t look
to older, fading stars for beauty tips, she explains.  Freddy is

--- PAGE 225 ---
needling and insistent, and an oﬀended Peggy ﬁnally blurts
out the truth: everyone in the oﬃce considers him “old-
fashioned”—the kiss of death in an industry that prides itself
on being cutting edge.
No one wants to be Freddy, oblivious to his reputation
until someon e gets angry and mouths oﬀ. So how can you
keep on top of perceptio ns and ensur e your rebranding is
taking root? Think back to the people you may have
consulted for your personal 360—friends and colleagues
who care about you and know you well. If they seemed
receptive to sharing feedback about you and your
perfor mance, this could be a good way to keep them
engaged and involved in your life, if they bring a positive,
action- oriented perspecti ve (one telltale sign is how hard
they work to improve themselves). Next, think about other
people in your company or industry whom you respect.
Who’s a connector (but not a gossip)? When you’ve
identiﬁed a small group of people whom you think would be
a good ﬁt, ask if they’d be interested in periodically
touching base to share ideas. Shoot for only three or four,
because you only want advice from the most perceptive
people you know .
With a smart, savvy group of advisers looking out for him,
Mad Men’s Freddy could have picked up early warning signs
he was viewe d as old-fashioned and taken steps to prevent
that. Similar ly, with your kitchen cabinet scanning the
horizon for threats and opportunities, you’ll be the ﬁrst to
know if trends are changing or your reputation stumbles and
will be able to quickly steer it forwar d.
After all, sometimes a quick ﬁx can make all the
diﬀer ence. Rebecca Zucker, the executive coach, recalls
that one of her clients, an attractive female management
consultant, had a problem everyone was afraid to talk to her
about. “It was her makeup, her hair, her jewelry,” says
Zuck er. “Her shirts would be too low cut. She wasn’t

--- PAGE 226 ---
portraying the sophisticated professional I think she’d
prefer.” When she ﬁnally learned the truth and made a few
simple changes, her car eer thrived.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 227 ---
Make a Public Commitment
But what if the changes you need to make are harder than
simply buying a more discreet wardrobe? It’s possible you
might ﬁnd yourself fallin g back into old patter ns you had
hoped to change. In that case, consider enlisting
accomplices who can encourage you on the right path.1 The
best way to leverage the inﬂuence of those friends and
colleagues is by making a public commitment.
Brian Stelter was a hotshot reporter with a dream job. His
independent blog covering the TV news industry became so
popular that he was recruited to cover television  and the
web for the New York Times . But all those hours sitting in
front of a computer and monitoring the ﬂicker of news
updates had taken their toll: at only twenty -four, he had
ballooned to an unhealthy 270 pounds. An expert at new
media, Brian  decided to use familiar tools to his advantage.
“I knew that I could not diet alone,” he wrote in August
2010. “I needed the help of a cheering section. But rather
than write a blog, keep a diary, or join Weight Watchers, I
decided to use Twitter .” His initial plan was to lose twenty -
ﬁve pounds in twenty -ﬁve weeks by publicly  blasting
updates like “Last nite: asparagus sted of fries, but too
much alcoho l. Today: fruit; then sushi, little bit of soy sauce,
1 cookie sted of usual 3.” Inspir ed by the six hundr ed
followers who eventually signed on, he reached his goal and
then decided to lose an additional twenty -ﬁve pounds befor e
his twenty -ﬁfth birthday . He eventually power ed down to
less than two hundr ed pounds using his unique calorie-
tracking method.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 228 ---
Keep from Backsliding
Keeping a public promise is one way to motivate yourself to
stay in line. Another is avoiding the loss of money . That’s
what three Yale professors discover ed when they founded
the website stickK.com (yes, with two “k’s”). Dean Karlan,
an economics professor, became intrigued with the idea of
opening a “Commitment Store” to help people stick to their
promises by making public contracts, with ﬁnancial
consequences attached. “The Commitment Contract
concept is based on two well-known principles of behavioral
economics,” the stickK.com website explains. “1. People
don’t always do what they claim they want to do, and 2.
Incentives get people to do things.”
Karlan’s ﬁrst test was his own. Like Stelter, he and a grad
school friend were disturbed about their steady weight gain,
so they decided to make a pact with profound
consequences. If either failed to lose the promised amount
of weight (their goal was thirty -eight pounds apiece), they
would forfeit half of their annual salary . Though there were
a few hitches along the way—lear ning, for instance, that
they had to make the contracts non-negotiable so they
wouldn’t let each other oﬀ the hook—they both eventually
lost the pounds. And they kept up the commitment to
maintaining their weight: “At one point, my friend bounced
up a bit, so he had to pay me $15,000,” Karlan writes. “This
payment was an investment in his ongoing health. Had I
refused to accept it, no futur e contracts would ever work.”
Today, Karlan still keeps up an ongoing comm itment
contract with another colleague to the tune of $1,000 per
week if he starts gaining weight. When the stakes are high
enough and the humiliation public enough, it can become
easy to do the right thing. Indeed, as of this writing,
stickK.com featur ed well over a hundr ed thousand pledges

--- PAGE 229 ---
and had over $8.3 million in bets on the line; many goals
had direct business implications, ranging from a pledge to
“cold call 120 businesses per week” to “get to work befor e
9:30 every day” to “no snark or uncalled-for negativity .”
Making any of those changes would be likely to improve
your car eer.
Try This
 
Make a list of your most “with it” friends and collea gues.
Reach out to three to six of them and ask if they’ d like
to get together periodically to trade ideas. Schedule a
meal with at least one of them, once a month, to keep
yourself fr esh.
Is there a key behavior you need to adopt (weight loss,
ﬁnally learning a new language, getting to work on
time)? Make a public commitment and a pledge so hard
it hurts— a $1,000 ﬁne for a minor infraction will get you
moving in the right dir ection fast.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 230 ---
Don’t Be Afraid to Reevaluate
You’re in the thick of your new professional identity . You’re
creating content, you’r e monitoring your new brand, you’ve
got your kitchen cabin et—and you’r e miserable. What
should you do?
Life is too short. It may be time to reinvent yourself yet
again or to go back (perhaps in a new form) to your old
identity . You should never be afraid to reevaluate your
choices and your options. That’s what happened with Tom
Benner, who lost his job as a newspaper reporter after more
than twenty years in the business. “Did I see it coming?” he
asks. “No. Should I have seen it coming? Maybe.”  In truth,
he felt insulated; he’d risen to a prestigious bureau chief
post, and he loved his work: “Covering live news, reporting
on it that day, the adrenaline of a deadline, writing for a
broad audien ce, getting information out to peop le—that’s
what jour nalism is all about.”
But newspapers were an industry in decline. The Project
for Excellence in Journalism estimates that a third of
American newspaper reporters lost their jobs in the 2000s
(indeed, I was one of them), and TV network news staﬀs
have been cut by half since their 1980s peak.2 It was hard
for Tom to give up a career path wher e he had found
fulﬁllment and professional success. He tried freelancing for
a few months, but it couldn’t compar e to his previous
income. Finally, he decided to bite the bullet; he got a job as
a communica tions director for a nonpr oﬁt. “I kept saying to
myself, I’ll give it a shot, this is what people do—they get
serious jobs.”
Tom was still able to enjoy parts of his job that carried
over, like writing reports and crafting op-eds. And he was

--- PAGE 231 ---
glad to pick up social media skills in his new position. But
the passion never kicked in for him, so after three years, he
decided to quit: “I didn’t feel like I was doing what I loved to
do and what I was best at.”
Somehow, he had to get back to journalism. There was no
returning to the pre-inter net glory days, when Sunday
papers were so ﬁlled with ads that lifting one could  give you
a hernia. But he did ﬁnd a meaningful opportunity,
becoming the part-time editor of a local newspaper written
and sold by homeless people as an alternative to
panhandling. “People who are smart get out of the
newspaper industry,” he admits ruefully . But he just couldn’t
help himself : “Our newsr oom is in the basement of the Old
Cambridge Baptist Church. It’s not the Boston Globe,  but I
still get a thrill that mak es things worthwhile.”
Even when we resear ch and strategize, it’s always
possible that our new direction might not be a ﬁt. Is it fun to
go to work? Do you feel like you’r e making progress in your
life? Are you doing what you want to do? If not, it’s
important to be open to that realization. Cultivating  a brand
is important,  but it has to be a brand you truly embrace. It’s
not easy to admit mistak es, but doing so early can save you
a great deal of tr ouble.
I have a friend who left her lucrative database
programming job to go to culinary school and even moved
to another state for her studies. But after a year and a
grueling internship that involved getting to work by 3 a.m.
to start baking, she realized databases weren’t so bad after
all. A year of culinary school wasn’t cheap, and she doesn’t
have a degree to show for it. Then again, it’s clear she
doesn’t want to be a professional chef, and now she has the
time and luxury of baking bread when she pleases. So be
honest with yourself and don’t be afraid to reevaluate your
strategy wher e necessary .

--- PAGE 232 ---
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 233 ---
Be Consistent
One of the most important ways you can maintain your
positive brand momentum is to be consistent. You want
people to feel they understand who you are, wher e you’r e
coming from, and the nature of your trajectory over time.
What you don’t want to do is look like an opportunist, a
brand problem that tripped up one notable young
entrepreneur .
Let’s imagine, for instance, that you founded an extremely
well-known company . And let’s imagine someone wrote a
semiﬁctionalized book alleging that you stole the idea for it
and then cheated your best friend out of billions of dollars.
Now let’s imagine there’s going to be a movie adaptation of
that book, which will be seen around the world. So the week
befor e it comes out, it would be a really good idea to
announce that you’r e giving away $100 million to charity,
right?
Actually, no. As you may have guessed, we’re talking
about Mark Zuck erber g, the contr oversial hoodie-clad
billionair e who was proﬁled in the Oscar -winning ﬁlm The
Social Network . A son of wealthy Westchester County, New
York, parents, he had no connection to hardscrabble
Newark, New Jersey . But appar ently, after meeting the city’s
charismatic mayor at a confer ence a couple months befor e,
he was moved to fork over $100 million to improve the
city’s public schools.
It would be churlish to criticize a massive charitable gift
that Zuck erber g didn’t have to make, and it’s appar ently
only the start, as he’s signed on to Bill Gates and Warren
Buﬀett’s Giving Pledge, which stipulates that he’ll give the
majority of his wealth to charity . But from a public relations
perspective, it was awful timing, appearing like a cynical
ploy to divert attention from a negative story . Even if you’r e

--- PAGE 234 ---
spending $100 million to help a good cause, you can still
look inauthentic if you appear to be acting for the wrong
reasons. You can’t buy goodwill—even with hundr eds of
millions of dollars—when you’r e in crisis. Instead, you need
to build it up over time.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 235 ---
Build Up Goodwill
Perhaps the antithesis of Zuck erber g’s quick-ﬁx attempt at
rebranding is Howar d Dean’s hard work and consistency,
which paid major political dividends for him, his reputation,
and his political party . You may remember Dean as the
former Vermont gover nor who soared to unprecedented
popularity in the 2004 presidential race, only to crash and
burn at the Iowa caucuses. As Dean’s New Hampshir e
communications director, I had an up-front look at him and
his campaign.
Dean genuinely wanted to reform American politics. He
despised the closed-door  calculations that wrote oﬀ entire
parts of the country as “unwinnable” for Democrats and
therefore cut oﬀ party resour ces (a situation that would only
lead them to become more unwinnable in the futur e). He
delighted in the national excitement his camp aign was
generating and, thanks to a new generation of online tools
like blogs, we were able to engage not just people in Iowa
and New Hampshir e (the early primary states that get
dispr oportionate love from political candidates) or major
donors. Instead, regular voters eagerly got involved , holding
Meetups acr oss the country .
But all that ended in January 2004 on the day of the Iowa
caucuses. Batter ed by an unceasing cavalcade of negative
ads funded by pseudo -independent groups tied to our
Democratic opponents (and quite likely hobbled  by our
campaign’s faulty strategy to bring in energetic non-Iowans
to volunteer, thereby alienating actual Iowans), Dean
ﬁnished a distant third. The campaign didn’t end that night;
it sputter ed on for another month. But it couldn’t overcome
the puncturing of Dean’s front-runner status and, even more
importantly, the iconic “Dean Scream,” which aired nonstop
on cable television. (During Dean’s concession speech, in

--- PAGE 236 ---
which he vowed to keep ﬁghting on in other state s, he had
to yell to be heard above  the crowd. The TV cameras only
picked up his microphone, not the backgr ound noise, so he
appear ed to be psychotically shouting for no reason at all,
an unfortunate image for a potential commander -in-chief .)
When Howar d Dean dropped out of the presidential race,
it would have been easy to skulk back to Vermont or head to
a tropical island. He’d come so close to victory, but had left
humiliated, mock ed by every smug anchor on television. I
would have understood the temptation; I could n’t bring
myself to move on to John Kerry’s campaign (the eventual
nominee) and instead took a job running a nonp roﬁt. But
Dean stayed  focused on his goal of building a strong
Democratic Party. He gamely campaigned around the
country for Kerry, despite Kerry operatives’ leading role in
producing the vitriolic ads that led to Dean’s downfall. And
Dean eventually set his sights on another role, far less
glamor ous than occupying  the White House: to be the head
of the Democratic National Committee (DNC).
The DNC, which promote s Democratic candidates across
the country, is a powerful organization. But it’s a far cry
from being president. Dean, undaunted, announce d in early
2005 that he was seeking the organization’s chair manship.
Through assiduous campaigning—even in areas oﬀ the
Democratic Party’s radar—and a vow to ensur e the Dems
ran a “50 State Campaign ” in the next presidential election,
he won the post and went on to a phenomenally successful
tenur e that teed up Barack Obama’s historic presidential
win. Dean never became president, but through his service
as DNC chair, he overcame the sting of his loss and found
another way to accomplish his goal.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 237 ---
Time Heals All W ounds
In the business spher e, similarly, the key to successful
rebranding is consistency and proving your values by living
them out every day. You may remember Michael Milken best
as the symbol of 1980s Wall Street excess. In 1989, the
former Wall Street highﬂier was charged with securities and
reporting violations; he eventually paid a $200 million ﬁne
and served just under two years in prison. For many
disgraced ﬁnanciers, that would be the end of the story . But
two decades later, Milken has redeemed himself entirely,
even earning a 2004 Fortune  magazine cover story praising
him as “The Man Who Changed Medicine.” How is that
possible?
For one, Milken began his commitment to philanthr opy in
the 1970s and launched his family foundation in 1982, long
befor e he ran into problems with the gover nment. He’s
funded a cornucopia of causes, from teacher recognition to
inner -city issues, but has notably aﬀected health care,
raising hundr eds of millions of dollars and driving
innovations in treating prostate cancer, melanoma, and
more. Said former CNN host Larry King, “When they cure
this disease [cancer], they’ll have to call it the Milken cure.”
Milken’s commitment to charity is obviously genuine and
provides a powerful lesson for all of us. With hard work,
focus, and consistency, it’s possible to become who you
want to be, regardless of your previous brand or even your
previous mistak es.
In today’s world, reinvent ing yourself isn’t optiona l. We’re
constantly learning, growing, and adapting; to be true to
ourselves, our personal brands need to reﬂect that. Taking
contr ol of your reputatio n and making sure it reﬂects the
real you is a critical starti ng point. Especially in the internet
era, traces of your old identity will never completely

--- PAGE 238 ---
disappear, and as long as you’r e thoughtful about what
you’ve lear ned along the way, that’s OK.
The challenge for all of us as we reinvent ourselves (in
large ways or small) is to be strategic about identif ying how
we wish to be perceived, developing a compelling story that
explains our evolution, and then spreading that message.
Consider it search engine optimization for your life: the
more connec tions you seek out and make, and the more
value and content you regularly add to the stream, the more
likely it is that your new brand will be known, recognized,
and sought out.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 239 ---
REMEMBER:
    Don’t assume your rebranding is a done deal. It’s a
process, not a onetime activity, so keep monitoring your
reputation to ensur e you’r e being perceived by others
the way you’d lik e.
    If there’s a key behavio r you need to change (losing
weight, asking for more referrals, writing at least one
blog post a week), make a public commitment, with
penalties attached if you don’t succeed. The glare of the
spotlight (and the threat of ﬁnancial loss) can do
wonders for your motivation.
    Reevalu ate periodic ally. Your goals might have
seemed great at the time, but if they’r e making you
unhappy now or don’t ﬁt wher e you are at this point in
your life, go ahead and r econsider them.
    Be consist ent in your new brand. If you want people
to treat the new you as a reality, rather than just a
phase, you have to reinfor ce it over time and
demonstrate your steady commitment.
    Your old brand neve r goes away . But, if you’re
thoughtful about the process, your past experience s can
add to and enrich your personal brand, even if there
have been struggles along the way .
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 240 ---
EPIL OGUE
Make Your Reinvention Work
For generations, the establishment mantra has been “work
hard and you’ll be r ecognized on the basis of merit.” The net
result? The guys with connections and powerful patrons got
all the breaks. But now, we’re in the midst of a new era of
faster -moving profession al trajectories, shorter tenur e at
jobs, and the ability to instantly communicate your message
across the world. That means your reputation isn’t a closely
guarded secret, whisper ed about in corridors anym ore. You
can monitor and shape how you’r e perceived in real time
and mak e adjustments as necessary .
That’s important if you’r e committed to building a career
at your company, moving  up the ranks, and strivin g for the
C-suite. It’s even more important if, like many of us, your
ambitions evolve over time and you want to change roles,
ﬁrms, or even professions. People are too busy paying
attention to themselves to pay close attention to you. L eft to
chance, their impression of you will be haphazar d, grabbing
onto the last thing they heard or a faint impression from
years ago. Luck might be with you—or it might not. You owe
it to yourself to tak e a mor e systematic appr oach.
It’s often hard, though, to see yourself as others do. We all
have blind spots, when it comes to both our strengths and
our weaknes ses. That’s why it’s so important to start by
bringing in trusted friends  and colleagues to help you better
understand wher e you’r e starting and the unique gifts you

--- PAGE 241 ---
possess. By talking with them individually and doing 360
interviews or holding a personal focus group, you can glean
important insights that you might not otherwi se learn.
Looking yourself up online and reviewing old perfor mance
reviews can also provide a sense of how others may be
viewing you fr om the outside in.
Armed with this information, you can move into resear ch
mode. You’ll start behind the scenes, with online resear ch
and a book binge to ensu re you’r e up on the canon ical texts
of the industry and can talk a good game when it comes to
current trends. Next, through friends or alumni connections,
you’ll reach out to actual people for informational
interviews, which, if done well, can lead to long-ter m
professional relationships , rather than just a hit-and-run
coﬀee.
As you begin to get a clear er sense of which directions
make the most sense to you, it’s time to test-drive those
assumptions. (After all, there’s only so much you can learn
on paper or through meetings at coﬀee shops.) Whether you
choose to dive in with a full-time internship or
apprenticeship, or to test the waters by volunteering on
week ends, you’ll be experiencing a new job or profession on
the ground, making contacts, and evaluating whether it’s a
good long-ter m ﬁt.
You’ll also start to focus on the skills you need to develop
for your next professional identity . In some cases, you can
expand the boundaries of your current job to get more
experience, or you may be able to moonlight and subsidize
your new path by working diligently in your current role. You
may also be considering graduate school, which is
sometimes mandatory (you’re not going to get far with your
medical aspirations if you don’t have an MD). But befor e
diving six ﬁgures into debt, think carefully about the skills or
connections you want to cultivate. Are there other (cheaper)
ways to do it? Could you take a class, or a summer  program,

--- PAGE 242 ---
or learn by volunteering? Only you can decide the right way
to prepare yourself pr ofessionally .
Another key ingredient in your professional advan cement
is ﬁnding the right mentor or mentors, because sometimes
you’ll want to tap the wisdom of several people or a group,
rather than one individual. We talked about the importance
of ﬁnding a mentor who’s looking out for your best interests
and wants to help you accomplish your goals, rather than
pushing her own agenda. And the secret to getting  the most
out of the relationship is recognizing that you can’t just wait
for wisdom to be imparted; you need to create your own
learning agenda, express thanks regularly, and make a
concerted eﬀort to give back to your mentor, however you
can.
Though the corporate world often values similarity  (hiring
recruits from the same school or promoting executives with
the same pedigr ee), the secret to your success actually
centers on your diﬀer ence. You shouldn’t even try to
compete head-to -head with the people who have been
working their way up in your new arena for the past ten or
twenty or thirty years. Instead, focus on what makes you
diﬀer ent and unique. What’s the skill you possess that no
one else does? How can you translate your past experience
into your new realm? That will be your calling card and path
to advancement.
An important component, of course, is ﬁnding a
compelling way to tell the story of that diﬀer ence. Your
narrative will engage others and allow them to make sense
of your transition. You’ll make the connections obvious so
they understand you’r e not swinging wildly from one realm
to another or trying to become someone else. Instead,
you’r e strategically applying your existing skills in a new
way that adds value.

--- PAGE 243 ---
Reintroducing yourself isn’t always easy. People have
preexisting ideas about you, and you’ll need to catch their
attention in order to overtur n them. That means
demonstrating your new identity with the help of validators,
like trusted colleagues who agree to talk you up and
highlight your recent successes. And wher e possib le, you’ll
align yourself with prominent projects or initiat ives that
allow you to showcase your skills to a wide audience.
Next, you’ll concentrate on building a portfoli o—both
online and oﬀ—to demonstrate your abilitie s. As a
knowledge work er, it’s sometimes hard to show people what
you know and can do. That’s why it’s so essential to create
intellectual property that others will want to read, share,
and comment on. Whether it’s through a blog, a video blog,
or a podcast series, you can ﬁnd the medium wher e you’r e
most comfortable. Creating content will allow you to set the
tenor of the public debate, meet and interact with the
leading lights of your industry, and build a reputation as a
thought leader . In the real world, meanwhile, you can
similarly brand yourself through taking leadership  roles in
professional associations and becoming a public speak er at
industry events.
Finally, the true secret of professional reinvention is to
keep moving forwar d. That means keeping watch on your
reputation by monitoring what’s being said about you online
and turning periodically to trusted friends for an
unvar nished look at how you can continue to improve.
Sometimes, there are hard behavioral changes you’ll have
to make, whether it’s quitting smoking or drilling down on
business development, and only a public commitment or the
threat of ﬁnancial loss can truly mobilize you. Those are the
sacriﬁces you have to make if you really want to make
change stick and accomplish something meaningful.
We’ve all seen too many examples of broken promises
and failed intentions. People will come to respect your new

--- PAGE 244 ---
brand and take you seriously when they see your day-in,
day-out commitment to crafting a new identity . People make
mistak es; it’s only human. But working hard, being
consistent, and building up goodwill over time will enable
your community, and the world, to better understand wher e
you’r e comin g from, and wher e you hope to go with your
life. They may even mobilize to help you get ther e.
Professional reinvention is almost never a onetime , ﬁx-it-
and-you’r e-done job. Instead, it’s a way of life and a way of
seeing the world—full of opportunity, open to new
possibilities, and awaiting your contribution. I hope this book
has been helpful as you consider and begin your reinvention
process. Reinventing your personal brand allows you to
optimize your life, constantly explor e new professional
frontiers, and be the person you want to be. Congratulations
on taking the ne xt step.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 245 ---
APPENDIX A
Your Professional Reinvention Self-
Assessment
Should you reinvent yourself? If you want to win that
promotion, shift into another professional role, join a new
company, or change car eers, you may need to .
Professional reinvention isn’t an overnight process, and it
involves getting feedback from others, developing new
skills, and manifesting the value you can bring. But you can
start by taking a thoughtful look at yourself . Your
impressions and ideas are likely to change over time as you
progress through Reinventing You: Deﬁne Your Brand,
Imagine Your Future. But for now, you can learn a lot by
putting your thoughts and assumptions on paper, and using
them as a baseline. Consider it a head start on your futur e.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 246 ---
Who You Are
My gr eatest str engths ar e:
My gr eatest weaknesses ar e:
My most mark etable skills ar e:
The most unusual aspects of my backgr ound or
experience ar e:


--- PAGE 247 ---
People of ten ask me about:
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 248 ---
Where You’re Going
My cur rent pr ofessional objective is:
Or, if you’r e not sur e . . .
Several ar eas that intrigue me pr ofessionally ar e:
The journals, books, and blogs I can read to learn more
about my ar eas of inter est ar e:
The people I know who ar e connected to those ar eas ar e:


--- PAGE 249 ---
The skills I’ll need to reach my professional objective (that
I don’t pr esently have) ar e:
Possible ways to gain those skills might be (volunteering,
job shadowing, r eading, graduate school, etc.):
The people I know who might advise me in this process
are:
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 250 ---
Your Competitive Advantage
My skills that ar e most r elevant in my new ar ena ar e:
What’s unusual about me, compar ed to people in my new
realm:
The reason my backgr ound or previous experience adds
value in my new ar ena:
The reason that working  in this new realm is actually a
continuation of what I’ve done in the past:


--- PAGE 251 ---
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 252 ---
Demonstrating Your Value
A majo r project or initiative in my new arena that I could
get involved in might be:
People of ten ask me about these topics (which might mak e
good blog posts or podcasts):
Professional associations I can join in my new arena
include:
Ways I can leverage social media to showcase my new
identity include:

--- PAGE 253 ---
I could approach the following organizations  about
speaking engagements:
The single most importan t change I can make, or initiative
I could undertak e, would be:
Good luck in your professional reinvention process. To learn
more, or to access hundr eds of free resour ces—fr om articles to
podcasts to videos—visit  www.dorieclark.com  and follow me
on Twitter @dorieclark.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 254 ---
APPENDIX B
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 255 ---
Classroom or Book Group Discussion
Questions
 
What public ﬁgures have personal brands that you
admir e? Why?
Can you think of public ﬁgures who have reinvented
themselves pr ofessionally? How so?
What do you think made them successful—or
unsuccessful—in their r einvention?
Have you reinvented yourself professionally? In what
way? What was easy, or challenging, about the
experience?
Did you plan out your reinvention in advance? If so,
what was the process you followed? How did you
deter mine how to get “ from her e to ther e”?
How did you let others know about your new brand? Did
they accept it immediately, or did you need to convince
them over time to accept the “ new you”?
Do you think professional  reinvention is becoming more
common? Why? If so, what are the implications of this
change?
How important do you think social media is for personal
branding? Do you use social media in a professional
conte xt? If yes, what’s your strategy for ensuring it
advances your pr ofessional r eputation?
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 256 ---
N o t e s
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 257 ---
CHAPTER 1
1. Megan Woolhouse, “A Jobs Pinch for the Ages,” Boston
Globe , July 21, 2011.
2. Ronald  Brownstein, “Upsi de Down,” National Journal, June
9, 2011.
3. Ibid.
4. Irving Rein et al., High Visibility : Transfor ming Your
Personal and Professional Brand (New York: McGraw-Hill,
2006).
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 258 ---
CHAPTER 2
1. Unless otherwise noted, all quotations come from
interviews conducted by the author .
2. Jennifer Preston, “Social Media History Becomes a New
Job Hurdle,” New York Times , July 20, 2011,
www.nytimes.com/2011/07/21/technology/ social-media-
history -becomes-a-new-job-hur dle.html?pagewanted=all .
3. Read my article, “How to Repair a Damaged Online
Reputation,” at www.dorieclark.com/r eputation .
4. Craig Lamb ert, “The Psyche on Automatic,” Harvar d
Magazine , November–December 2010,
http://harvar dmagazine.com/2010/11/the-psyche- on-
automatic?page=0 ,0.
5. Kevin Lewis, “Liking the Women, but Promoting the Men,”
Boston Globe , July 31, 2011,
www.boston.com/bostonglobe/ideas/articles/2011/07/31/
uncommon_knowledge/ .
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 259 ---
CHAPTER 7
1. Read my article, “How to Develop Your Unique Brand,” at
www .dorieclark.com/uniquebrand .
2. http://sethgodin.com/sg/ .
3. Aljean Harmetz, “New Face; Moving Up to ‘Pretty’ Roles:
Jennifer Grey,” New York Times , August 28, 1987,
www.nytimes.com/1987/08/28/movies/ new-face-moving-up-
to-pretty-roles-jennifer -grey.html?scp=5&sq=jennifer%
20grey&st=cse .
4. Ann Kolson, “Fairy Tale Without an Ending,” New York
Times , August 17, 1997,
www.nytimes.com/1997/08/17/movies/fairy -tale-without-an-
ending.
html:scp=13&sq=jennifer%20gr ey%20nose&st=cse&pagew
anted=2 .
5. “Plastic Surgery of the Stars,” New York Post, www
.nypost.com/f/print/pagesix/celebrity_photos/plastic_sur gery
_befor e_after_vUlDH3Y aHlqKGkvg0NGQbK .
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 260 ---
CHAPTER 8
1 Alex Williams, “Too Much Information? Ignor e It,” New Y ork
Times , November 11, 2007,
www.nytimes.com/2007/11/11/fashion/11guru.html?
adxnnl=1&adxnnlx=1317233505-
fdV7Vk22aN4KDIeuP/Fpkw .
2. “Tim Ferriss on Tolerable Mediocrity, False Idols,
Diversif ying Your Identity, and the Advice He Gives
Startups,” Signal vs. Noise , http://37signals.
com/svn/posts/2734-tim-fer riss-on-tolerable-mediocrity -
false-idols-diversif ying- your-identity -and-the-advice-he-
gives-startups .
3. Melissa Corliss Delor enzo, “Why Hire a Poet to Help Your
Company?” Her Circle, June 16, 2011,
www.hercircleezine.com/2011/06/16/why -hire-a-poet-to -
help- your-company/ .
4. Danielle Sacks, “ Alex Bogusk y Tells All: He L eft the W orld’s
Hottest Agen cy to Find His Soul,” Fast Company , September
1, 2010, www .fastcompany .com/node/1676890/print .
5. Richard L. Berke, “The 2000 Campaign: Tactics, Ad Blitz to
Start as Bush and Gore Deﬁne Key States,” New York Times ,
August 20, 2000, www.nytimes.com/2000/08/20/us/2000-
campaign-tactics-ad-blitz-start-bush-gor e-deﬁne-k ey-
states.html?scp=4&sq=Al%20Gor e%20Bob%
20Shrum&st=cse .
6. Warren Bennis, with Patricia Ward Bieder man, Still
Surprised: A Memoir of a Life in Leadership  (San Francisco:
Jossey -Bass, 2010).

--- PAGE 261 ---
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 262 ---
CHAPTER 9
1. The Chip Conley material is adapted from Dorie  Clark,
“Why You Should Be an Emotionally Open Leader,”
Forbes.com, March 31, 2012,
www.forbes.com/sites/dorieclark/2012/03/31/why -you-
should-be-an- emotionally -open-leader/ ; and Dorie Clark,
“How to Be Yourself on Social Media—W ithout Freaking Out
Your Boss,” Forbes.com, August 27, 2012,
www.forbes.com/sites/dorieclark/2012/08/27/how-to -be-
yourself -on-social-media-without-fr eaking- out-your-boss/ .
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 263 ---
CHAPTER 10
1. “The Copy blogger Files—Interview with Brian Clark,”
TopRank Online Mark eting Blog,
www.toprankblog.com/2009/01/interview-brian-clark-
copyblogger/ .
2. Nate Elliott, “The Easiest  Way to a First-P age Ranking on
Google,” Forrester Blogs , January 8, 2009,
http://blogs.for rester .com/interactive_mark eting/
2009/01/the-easiest-way .html .
3. Read my article, “How to Avoid Social Media Overload,” at
www.dorieclark. com/overload.
4. “Write a Guest Post for I Will Teach You to Be Rich,” www
.iwillteachyoutoberich.com/write-a-guest-post-for -i-will-
teach- you-to -be-rich/ .
5. Darren Rowse, “If You Had a Gun Against Your Head to
Double Your Readership in Two Weeks, What Would You Do?
—An Interview with Tim Ferriss,” ProBlogger , July 25, 2007,
www.problogger .net/ar chives/2007/ 07/25/if -you-had-a-gun-
against- your-head-to -double- your-readership-in-two -weeks-
what-would- you-do -an-interview-with-tim-fer riss/.
6. B. L. Ochman, “Interview —Seth Godin on How Often to
Post to Your Blog,” Advertising Age, January 12, 2009,
http://adage.com/article/digitalne xt/ interview-seth-godin-
post-blog/133719/ .
7. Read my article, “Why Social Media Wastes Leaders’
Time,” at www .dorieclark.com/wasting-time. (But don’t take
it as an e xcuse not to do it!)

--- PAGE 264 ---
8. Chris Brogan, “My Big Speaking Oﬀer,” December 24,
2011, www .chrisbr ogan.com/my -big-speaking- oﬀer/ .
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 265 ---
CHAPTER 11
1. Check out Kerry Patterson’s excellent book Change
Anything: The New Science of Personal Success  (New York:
Business Plus, 2011), which addr esses the topic.
2. Project for Excellence in Journalism,
www.stateof themedia.or g/ 2010/overview_k ey_ﬁndings.php .
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 266 ---
A c k n o w l e d g m e n t s
I owe deep thanks to many people, without whom
Reinventing You wouldn’t have been possible. First, to
Josette Akresh-Gonzales, whose help and persistence
enabled me to connect with the team at Harvar d Business
Review,  and to Gardiner Morse, who gave the nod to a new
writer and greenlighted the blog post, “Reinven ting Your
Personal Brand,” from which this book sprang; and to Karen
Dillon, who saw its potential and helped the blog eventually
become an HBR magazine  piece. My agent Carol Franco and
my editors, Jeﬀ Kehoe and Erica Truxler, have been
invaluable in shepher ding this book through the
development process and ensuring it’s the very best it can
be. And you wouldn’t be reading this were it not for the top-
notch production eﬀorts of Allison Peter; the mark eting
magic of Julie Devoll, Nina Nocciolino, Tracy Williams, and
John Wynne; my Tufts University intern, Emilia Luna; plus
the spot- on cover design by Stephani F inks.
I’m extremely grateful to my interview subjects, who were
kind enough  to speak with me so that others might learn
from their e xperiences. Y ou ar e an inspiration.
I want to thank everyone  at Harvar d Business Review  for
giving me the opportunity  to write and share ideas regularly
on the HBR.org blog and in the magazine. I’d also like to
thank my Forbes  editor s, Fred Allen and Bruce Upbin, who
have enabled me to blog about professional reinvention and
many other topics.

--- PAGE 267 ---
Credit for everything is due to Gail Clark, who is the most
loving and caring mother  anyone could ask for. I’d also like
to recognize Ann Thomas, whose kindness and care helped
shape me into the person I am today . And P atty A delsber ger:
I miss you. I’m deeply thankful to Hilary Harkness, who
provided incomparable support during the writing process,
and to Gideon and Harriet, the world’s best cats and editors.
Please consider adop ting a homeless pet today
(www.petﬁnder .com ).
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 268 ---
About the Author
Dorie Clark  is a mark eting strategy consultant and
frequent contributor to Harvar d Business Review  and
Forbes . Recognize d as a “branding expert” by the
Associated Press, Clark consults and speaks for a diverse
range of clients, including EMC, Google, the Ford
Foundation, Yale University, the Mount Sinai Medical Center,
and the National P ark Service.
Clark, a former presidential campaign spokeswoman, has
taught mark eting and communications at Tufts University,
Suﬀolk University, Emerson College, and Smith College
Executive Education and has guest lectur ed at universities
including Harvar d, Geor getown, and the University of
Michigan. She is quoted frequently in the international
media, including NPR, the BBC, and U.S. News & World
Report . She is also a columnis t for Mint,  India’s second-
largest busin ess newspap er, and the American Management
Association’s publications.
A former journalist, Clark won two New England Press
Association awar ds for her coverage, respectively, of
religion and transportatio n policy . She is also the director of
the documentary ﬁlm The Work of 1000,  about the
successful cleanup of the Nashua River in Massachusetts
and New Hampshir e. Clark  currently serves as cochair of the
Board of Visitors of Fenway Health and is a memb er of the
Board of Overseers of the Massachusetts Society for the
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals.

--- PAGE 269 ---
At age fourteen, Clark enter ed Mary Baldwin College’s
Program for the Exceptionally Gifted. At eighteen, she
graduated Phi Beta Kappa from Smith College, and two
years later received a Master of Theological Studies from
Harvar d Divinity School. She divides her time between
Somerville, Massachusetts, and New Y ork City .
For more information, visit www.dorieclark.com  or follow
her on T witter @dorieclark.
OceanofPDF .com