

--- PAGE 1 ---


--- PAGE 2 ---
The Charisma Myth
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 3 ---
The Charisma Myth
How Anyone Can
Master the Art and Science
of Personal Magnetism
Olivia F ox Cabane
Portfolio • P enguin
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 4 ---
PORTFOLIO / PENGUIN
Published by the P enguin Gr oup
Penguin Gr oup (US A) Inc., 375 Hudson Str eet,
New Y ork, New Y ork 10014, U.S.A .
Penguin Gr oup (Canada), 90 Eglinton A venue East, Suite 700,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada M4P 2Y3
(a division of P earson P enguin Canada Inc.)
Penguin Books Ltd, 80 Strand, L ondon WC2R 0RL, England
Penguin Ir eland, 25 St. Stephen’s Gr een, Dublin 2, Ir eland
(a division of P enguin Books Ltd)
Penguin Books Australia Ltd, 250 Camberwell R oad, Camberwell,
Victoria 3124, Australia
(a division of P earson Australia Gr oup Pty Ltd)
Penguin Books India Pvt Ltd, 11 Community Centr e, Panchsheel P ark,
New Delhi–110 017, India
Penguin Gr oup (NZ), 67 Apollo Drive, R osedale, Auckland 0632,
New Zealand (a division of P earson New Zealand Ltd)
Penguin Books (South A frica) (Pty) Ltd, 24 Stur dee A venue,
Rosebank, Johannesbur g 2196, South A frica
Penguin Books Ltd, R egister ed Oﬃces:
80 Strand, L ondon WC2R 0RL, England
First published in 2012 by P ortfolio/P enguin,
a member of P enguin Gr oup (US A) Inc.
1 3 5 7 9 10 8 6 4 2
Copyright © Olivia F ox Cabane, 2012
All rights r eserved
Library of Congr ess Cataloging-in-P ublication Data
Cabane, Olivia F ox.
The charisma myth : how anyone can master the art and science of personal
magnetism / Olivia F ox Cabane.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical r eferences and inde x.
ISBN: 978-1-101-56030-3
1. Charisma (P ersonality trait) I. T itle.
BF698.35.C45C33 2012
158.2—dc23
2011043729
Printed in the United States of America
Set in A dobe Caslon P ro
Designed by Elyse Str ongin and Neuwirth & Associates

--- PAGE 5 ---
No part of this book may be r eproduced, scanned, or distributed in any printed
or electr onic for m without per mission. Please do not participate in or encourage
piracy of copyrighted materials in violation of the author’s rights. P urchase only
authorized editions.
While the author has made every eﬀort to pr ovide accurate telephone numbers
and Inter net addr esses at the time of publication, neither the publisher nor the
author assumes any r esponsibility for er rors, or for changes that occur af ter
publication. F urther, the publisher does not have any contr ol over and does not
assume any r esponsibility for author or thir d-party W eb sites or their content.
ALWAYS LEARNING PEARSON
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 6 ---
C o n t e n t s
Introduction
1 Charisma Demystiﬁed
2 The Charismatic Behaviors: P resence, P ower, and
Warmth
3 The Obstacles to P resence, P ower, and W armth
4 Over coming the Obstacles
5 Creating Charismatic Mental States
6 Diﬀer ent Charisma Styles
7 Charismatic F irst Impr essions
8 Speaking—and Listening—with Charisma
9 Charismatic Body Language
10 Diﬃcult Situations
11 Presenting with Charisma
12 Charisma in a Crisis
13 The Charismatic Life: Rising to the Challenge
Conclusion
Recommended R esour ces
Chapter Summaries
Charisma Ex ercises
Acknowledgments
Notes
About the Author

--- PAGE 7 ---
Index
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 8 ---
Introduction
MARIL YN MONROE W ANTED  to pr ove a point.
It was a sunny summer day in New Y ork City, 1955. W ith a
magazine editor and a photographer in tow, Marilyn walk ed
down into Grand Central T erminal. Though it was the middle
of a busy workday and the platfor m was pack ed with
people, not a single person noticed her as she stood waiting
for the subway . As the photographer’s camera click ed, she
boarded the train and r ode along quietly in a cor ner of the
car. Nobody r ecognized her .
Marilyn wanted to show that just by deciding to, she could
be either glamor ous Marilyn Monr oe or plain Nor ma Jean
Baker. On the subway, she was Nor ma Jean. But when she
resurfaced onto the busy New Y ork sidewalks, she decided
to tur n into Marilyn. She look ed ar ound and teasingly ask ed
her photographer : “Do you want to see her?” Ther e wer e no
grand gestur es—she just “ﬂuﬀed up her hair, and struck a
pose.”
With this simple shif t, she suddenly became magnetic. An
aura of magic seemed to ripple out fr om her, and everything
stopped. T ime stood still, as did the people ar ound her, who
blinked in amazement as they suddenly r ecognized the star
standing in their midst. In an instant Marilyn was engulfed
by fans, and “it took several shoving, scary minutes” for the
photographer to help her to escape the gr owing cr owd. 1
Charisma has always been an intriguing and contr oversial
topic. When I tell people at confer ences or cocktail parties
that I “teach charisma,” they immediately perk up and of ten
exclaim, “ But I thought it was something that you either
have or don’t.” Some see it as an unfair advantage, others
are eager to lear n, everyone  is fascinated. And they ar e

--- PAGE 9 ---
right to be so . Charismatic people impact the world, whether
they’r e starting new pr ojects, new companies, or new
empir es.
Have you ever wonder ed what it would feel lik e to be as
magnetic as Bill Clinton or as captivating as Steve Jobs was?
Whether you think you alr eady have some charisma and
would lik e to tak e it to the ne xt level or you’ve been wishing
for a bit of that magic but think that you just ar en’t the
charismatic type, I have good news: charisma is a skill that
you can lear n and practice.
What Will Charisma Do for Y ou?
Imagine what your life would be lik e if you knew that the
moment you enter ed a r oom, people would immediately
take notice, want to hear what you have to say, and be
eager to ear n your appr oval.
For charismatic people, this is a way of life. Everyone is
impacted by their pr esence. P eople ar e magnetically drawn
to them and feel strangely compelled to help them in any
way they can. Charismatic people seem to lead char med
lives: they have mor e romantic options, they mak e mor e
money, and they e xperience less str ess.
Charisma gets people to lik e you, trust you, and want to
be led by you. It can deter mine whether you’r e seen as a
follower or a leader, whether your ideas get adopted, and
how eﬀectively your pr ojects ar e implemented. Lik e it or
not, charisma can mak e the world go r ound—it mak es
people want  to do what you want them to do .
Charisma is, of course, critical in business. Whether you’r e
applying for a new job or want to advance within your
organization, it will help you achieve your goal. Multiple
concur ring studies indicate that charismatic people r eceive
higher perfor mance ratings and ar e viewed as mor e
eﬀective by their superiors and subor dinates. 2

--- PAGE 10 ---
If you’r e a leader, or aspir e to be one, charisma matters. It
gives you a competitive advantage in attracting and
retaining the very best talent. It mak es people want to work
with you, your team, and your company . Resear ch shows
that those following charismatic leaders perfor m better,
experience their work as mor e meaningful, and have mor e
trust in their leaders than those following eﬀective but
noncharismatic leaders. 3
As Wharton School business pr ofessor R obert House
notes, charismatic leaders “cause followers to become
highly committed to the leader’s mission, to mak e
signiﬁcant personal sacriﬁces, and to perfor m above and
beyond the call of duty .”4
Charisma is what enables one successful salesman to sell
ﬁve times mor e than his colleagues in the same r egion. It’s
the diﬀer ence between entr epreneurs who have investors
banging on their doors and those who have to beg the bank
for a loan.
The power of charisma is equally valuable outside of the
business envir onment. It’s useful for the stay -at-home mom
who needs to inﬂuence her childr en, their teachers, or other
community members. It can be an invaluable tool for high
school students who’d lik e to ace their college interviews or
are running for leadership r oles in student or ganizations. It
can help individuals become mor e popular with their peers
and feel mor e conﬁdent in social situations. Charismatic
physicians ar e better lik ed by patients and ar e in gr eater
demand, and their patients ar e mor e likely to adher e to the
medical tr eatments they pr escribe. They’r e also less lik ely
to be sued when things go wr ong. Charisma matters even in
resear ch and academia: charismatic individuals ar e mor e
likely to get published, to attract r esear ch funding fr om
industry grants, or to teach the most desirable courses. The
professor who is always sur rounded by admiring students
after lectur es—that’s charisma, too .

--- PAGE 11 ---
It’s Not Magic, It’s Learned Behaviors
Contrary to popular belief, people ar e not simply bor n
charismatic—innately magnetic fr om birth. If charisma wer e
an inher ent attribute, charismatic people would always be
captivating, and that’s just not the case. Even for the most
engaging superstar, charisma can be pr esent one moment
and absent the ne xt. Marilyn Monr oe could “tur n oﬀ” her
charisma lik e ﬂipping a switch and go completely unnoticed.
To turn her charisma back on, she simply changed her body
language.
As extensive r esear ch in r ecent years has shown,
charisma is the r esult of speciﬁc nonverbal behaviors, 5 not
an inher ent or magical personal quality . This is one of the
reasons why charisma levels ﬂuctuate: its pr esence depends
on whether or not someone is e xhibiting these behaviors.
Have you ever had the e xperience of feeling totally
conﬁdent, master of a situation? A moment when people
seemed impr essed by you—even just one moment of the
people ar ound you going “W ow!” W e don’t necessarily think
of these e xperiences as charisma, or consider ourselves
charismatic, because we assume that charismatic people
are magnetic every instant of every day . They ar en’t.
One of the r easons charisma is mistak enly held to be
innate is that, lik e many other social skills, charismatic
behaviors ar e generally lear ned early in life. In fact, people
usually don’t consciously r ealize they ar e lear ning them.
They’r e just trying new behaviors, seeing the r esults, and
reﬁning them. Eventually, the behaviors become instinctive.
Countless well-known charismatic ﬁgur es work ed har d to
gain their charisma, incr easing it step by step. But because
we come to know them at the peak of their charisma, it can
be har d to believe these superstars wer en’t always so
impressive.
Former Apple CEO Steve Jobs, consider ed one of the most
charismatic CEOs of the decade, did not start out that way .

--- PAGE 12 ---
In fact, if you watch his earliest pr esentations, you’ll see
that he came acr oss as bashful and awkwar d, veering fr om
overly dramatic to downright nerdy. Jobs pr ogressively
increased his level of charisma over the years, and you can
see the gradual impr ovement in his public appearances.
Charisma has come under the scrutiny of sociologists,
psychologists, and cognitive and behavioral scientists. It has
been studied in multiple ways, fr om clinical laboratory
experiments and cr oss-sectional and longitudinal survey
resear ch to qualitative interpr etative analysis. The subjects
of these studies have been pr esidents, military leaders,
students of all ages, and business e xecutives fr om low-level
managers to CEOs. Thanks to such r esear ch, we now
understand charisma as a set of behaviors.
What Does Charismatic Behavior Look Lik e?
When we ﬁrst meet someone, we instinctively assess
whether that person is a potential friend or foe and whether
they have the power to enact those intentions. P ower and
intentions ar e what we’r e aiming to assess. “ Could you
move mountains for me? And would you car e to do so?” T o
answer the ﬁrst question, we try to assess how much power
he or she has. T o answer the second question, we try to
assess how much he or she lik es us. When you meet a
charismatic person, you get the impr ession that they have a
lot of power and they lik e you a lot.
The equation that pr oduces charisma is actually fairly
simple. All you have to do is give the impr ession that you
possess both high power and high war mth, since
charismatic behaviors pr oject a combination of these two
qualities. “ Fight or ﬂight?” is the power question. “ Friend or
foe?” is the war mth question.
A ﬁnal dimension underlies both of these qualities:
presence. When people describe their e xperience of seeing

--- PAGE 13 ---
charisma in action, whether they met Colin P owell,
Condoleezza Rice, or the Dalai Lama, they of ten mention
the individual’s e xtraor dinary “pr esence.”
Presence is the single most r equested aspect of charisma
when I’m coaching e xecutives. They want to incr ease their
executive pr esence  or boardroom pr esence . And they’r e
right to focus on it: pr esence tur ns out to be the r eal cor e
component of charisma, the foundation upon which all else
is built. When you’r e with a charismatic master—tak e Bill
Clinton, for e xample—you not only feel his power and a
sense of war m engagement, you also feel that he’s
completely her e with you, in this moment. P resent.
Practical Magic
Charisma has been tur ned into an applied science. What
this book does is translate the science into practical,
immediately applicable tools, with measurable r esults. Y ou’ll
learn charisma in a methodical, systematic way, with
practical e xercises immediately useful in the r eal world.
And, unlik e those of us who lear ned by trial and er ror, you
won’t have to waste any time ﬁguring out what works and
what doesn’t. You can go straight to the tried-and-true tools
that r eally do enhance charisma.
Becoming mor e charismatic does involve work—work that
is sometimes har d, uncomfortable, and even daunting. But
it’s also incr edibly r ewar ding, both in ter ms of how you will
relate to yourself and how others will r elate to you. It
involves managing your mental ecosystem, understanding
and attending to your own needs, as well as knowing which
behaviors inspir e others to see you as charismatic and
learning how to pr oject them.
This book will guide you thr ough that pr ocess. It will give
you concr ete tools for pr ojecting the thr ee crucial aspects of
charisma: pr esence, power, and war mth. As you use them,

--- PAGE 14 ---
you will e xperience an incr eased sense of personal
magnetism—and if it was alr eady str ongly pr esent, you’ll
gain ﬁner contr ol over that charismatic power . You’ll lear n
how to har ness it and how to skillfully wield it. Y ou’ll also
learn how to choose the right kind of charisma for your
personality and your goals in any situation.
You’ll get an inside peek at what goes on in the minds—
and bodies—of charismatic people. I’ll give you insights into
what the CEOs I coach wr estle with behind closed doors.
What you’ll ﬁnd her e is practical magic: unique
knowledge, drawn from a variety of sciences, r evealing what
charisma r eally is and how it works. Y ou’ll get both the
insights and the techniques you need to apply this
knowledge. The world will become your lab, and every time
you meet someone, you’ll get an opportunity to e xperiment.
Once you’ve master ed the basics, you’ll be r eady to lear n
how to be charismatic even in diﬃcult situations, for
instance when you’r e having a car eer-changing
conversation, dealing with a diﬃcult person, or delivering a
presentation. And once you know how to access charisma at
will, you’ll get the insider secr ets to living life as a
charismatic person.
You’ll lear n how to become mor e inﬂuential, mor e
persuasive, and mor e inspiring. Y ou’ll lear n how to e xude
charisma—the ability to move thr ough a r oom and have
people go, “W ow, who’s that?”
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 15 ---
1
Charisma Demystiﬁed
IN THE TORRID  London summer of 1886, W illiam Gladstone was
up against Benjamin Disraeli for the post of prime minister
of the United Kingdom. This was the V ictorian era, so
whoever won was going to rule half the world. In the very
last week befor e the election, both men happened to tak e
the same young woman out to dinner . Naturally, the pr ess
asked her what impr essions the rivals had made. She said,
“After dining with Mr . Gladstone, I thought he was the
clever est person in England. But af ter dining with Mr .
Disraeli, I thought I was the clever est person in England.”
Guess who won the election? It was the man who made
others  feel intelligent, impr essive, and fascinating: Benjamin
Disraeli.
Consciously or not, charismatic individuals choose speciﬁc
behaviors that mak e other people feel a certain way . These
behaviors can be lear ned and perfected by anyone. In fact,
in contr olled laboratory e xperiments, r esear chers wer e able
to raise and lower people’s levels of charisma as if they
were turning a dial. 1
Contrary to commonly held charisma myths, you don’t
have to be naturally outgoing, you don’t have to be
physically attractive, and you won’t have to change your
personality . No matter wher e you’r e starting fr om, you can
signiﬁcantly incr ease your personal charisma and r eap the
rewar ds both in business and in daily life.
The most common charisma myth is that you have to be
naturally boister ous or outgoing to be charismatic. One of

--- PAGE 16 ---
the most inter esting r esear ch ﬁndings is that you can be a
very charismatic intr overt. In W ester n society, we place
such emphasis on the skills and abilities of e xtroverts that
introverts can end up feeling defective and uncool. But
introversion is not a ter minal handicap. In fact, as we’ll see,
it can be a str ong advantage for certain for ms of charisma.
It is also a myth that you have to be attractive to be
charismatic. Countless charismatic ﬁgur es wer e far fr om
ﬁtting classic standar ds of beauty . Chur chill was not
generally consider ed handsome and certainly not known for
his se x appeal. And yet he was one of history’s most
inﬂuential and powerful leaders.
Yes, good looks do confer some advantage. But it’s very
possible to be charismatic without a striking face or ﬁgur e.
In fact, charisma itself will mak e you mor e attractive. When
instructed to e xhibit speciﬁc charismatic behaviors in
contr olled e xperiments, participants’ levels of attractiveness
were rated signiﬁcantly higher than befor e.2
Last but not least, you won’t have to change your
personality . In or der to become mor e charismatic, you don’t
have to for ce yourself into one particular personality style or
do something that is against your natur e.
Instead, you will lear n some new skills.
Through charisma training you will lear n how to adopt a
charismatic postur e, how to war m up your eye contact, and
how to modulate your voice in ways that mak e people pay
attention. Thr ee quick tips to gain an instant charisma boost
in conversation:
Lower the intonation of your voice at the end of your
sentences.
Reduce how quickly and how of ten you nod.
Pause for two full seconds befor e you speak.
As you can see, these ar e simple tweaks, not deep value
changes. Y our personality will stay the same as long as you

--- PAGE 17 ---
want it to .
Will these new skills and behaviors feel odd at ﬁrst? They
may. But, then, so did brushing your teeth when you ﬁrst
learned how, though now (I hope) it’s become a habit you
perfor m each day without thinking. Lik e many new skills,
charismatic behaviors might feel awkwar d at ﬁrst, but with
practice they will become second natur e, like walking,
talking, or driving. This book is your step-by -step guide to
acquiring these behaviors and making them your own.
We understand that pr oﬁciency at chess, singing, or
hitting a fastball r equir es conscious practice. Charisma is a
skill that can also be developed thr ough conscious practice,
and because we’r e interacting with people all the time, we
get to use our charisma tools on a daily basis.
I know that a person’s charisma level can be changed
through conscious practice because I’ve helped countless
clients incr ease theirs in this way . Interviewing people close
to my clients befor e and af ter our work together conﬁr med
that they wer e able to change how people per ceived them.
I’ve also taught these charisma tools at both the
under graduate and graduate levels, af ter UC Berk eley’s
business school ask ed me to cr eate a complete cur riculum
for charisma and leadership.
If you follow the instructions in this book, you will increase
your level of charisma. And once these practices become
second natur e, they k eep operating in the backgr ound
without your needing to give them any thought—and you’ll
keep r eaping their r ewar ds from then onwar d.
How This Will W ork for Y ou
I’ve r everse-engineer ed the science of charisma by lear ning
the behavioral and cognitive science behind it and striving
to extract the most practical tools and techniques. This book

--- PAGE 18 ---
helps you put the science into practice so that you can
accelerate your lear ning curve.
I am oﬀering you the tools that will give you the highest
return on your investment and the best, most eﬀective
techniques fr om a br oad range of disciplines—fr om
behavioral, cognitive, and neur oscience to meditation; fr om
peak-perfor mance athletic conditioning to Hollywood
Method acting.
I’ll give you the science when it’s r elevant (or fun, or
fascinating), and, mor e important, I’ll give you the practical
tools. My goal with this book is to give you techniques you
can immediately apply to gain both the skills and the self -
conﬁdence that lead to outstanding perfor mance.
When I’m ask ed how soon my coaching pr oduces r esults, I
answer : In one session, you’ll feel the diﬀer ence. In two
sessions, others will see the diﬀer ence. In thr ee sessions,
you’ll have a whole new pr esence.
However, just r eading this book won’t yield its full
beneﬁts. Y ou would be shortchanging yourself if you avoided
any of the e xercises, as odd or even uncomfortable as they
may feel at times. T o be successful, you have to be willing to
put in the eﬀort of applying what you r ead. When an
exercise asks you to close your eyes and imagine a scene,
really close your eyes and do it. When I ask you to write out
a scenario, grab a piece of paper and a pen that writes.
This is the very challenge I bring into the oﬃce of every
executive who’s ever hir ed me. Ther e is no substitute for
doing the e xercises. Skimming thr ough them with the
earnest intention of completing them “another day” is not
enough, nor is doing only the e xercises that seem easy or
interesting. If I ask you to do something, it’s for a good
reason, and it will have a r eal impact on your level of
charisma.
Some of the techniques you’ll lear n her e will give you
results immediately, such as lear ning how to be charismatic
when pr esenting to audiences small or lar ge. Others will

--- PAGE 19 ---
take weeks to fully unfold. Some might be surprising, lik e
learning how your toes can help maximize your charisma
potential.
When I ask ed one of my clients what advice he would give
others about to start this work, he said: “T ell them that:
even though it can seem intimidating at ﬁrst, and you’ll be
taken out of your comfort zone, it’s worth it.” Commit, and
do your homework.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 20 ---
2
The Charismatic Behaviors
Presence, Power , and W armth
CHARISMA TIC BEHA VIOR CAN  be br oken down into thr ee cor e
elements: pr esence, power, and war mth. These elements
depend both on our conscious behaviors and on factors we
don’t consciously contr ol. People pick up on messages we
often don’t even r ealize we’r e sending thr ough small
changes in our body language. In this chapter, we’ll e xplor e
how these signals can be inﬂuenced. In or der to be
charismatic, we need to choose mental states that mak e our
body language, wor ds, and behaviors ﬂow together and
express the thr ee cor e elements of charisma. Since
presence is the foundation for everything else, that’s wher e
we’ll start.
Presence
Have you ever felt, in the middle of a conversation, as if
only half of your mind wer e present while the other half was
busy doing something else? Do you think the other person
noticed?
If you’r e not fully pr esent in an interaction, ther e’s a good
chance that your eyes will glaze over or that your facial
reactions will be a split-second delayed. Since the human
mind can r ead facial e xpressions in as little as seventeen
milliseconds, 1 the person you’r e speaking with will lik ely
notice even the tiniest delays in your r eactions.

--- PAGE 21 ---
We may think that we can fak e presence. W e may think
that we can fak e listening. W e believe that as long as we
seem attentive, it’s ok ay to let our brains chur n on other
things. But we’r e wrong. When we’r e not fully pr esent in an
interaction, people will see it. Our body language sends a
clear message that other people r ead and r eact to, at least
on a subconscious level.
You’ve sur ely had the e xperience of talking to someone
who wasn’t r eally listening. Maybe they seemed to be just
“going thr ough the motions” of listening to you so you
wouldn’t be oﬀended. Somehow, they didn’t seem to be
paying full attention. How did you feel then? Brushed oﬀ?
Annoyed? Just plain bad? As a student in one of my Harvar d
lectur es told me: “It happened r ecently when I was talking
to someone—I felt she wasn’t r eally pr esent. I felt r esentful,
inferior to whatever was mor e important to her than our
conversation.”
Not only can the lack of pr esence be visible, it can also be
perceived as inauthentic, which has even worse emotional
consequences. When you’r e per ceived as disingenuous, it’s
virtually impossible to generate trust, rapport, or loyalty .
And it’s impossible to be charismatic.
Presence is a lear nable skill. Lik e any other ability (fr om
painting to playing the piano), you can incr ease it with
practice and patience. Being pr esent means simply having a
moment-to -moment awar eness of what’s happening. It
means paying attention to what’s going on rather than
being caught up in your own thoughts.
Now that you know the cost of lacking pr esence, try the
exercise on the ne xt page to test yourself, see how pr esent
you can be, and lear n three simple techniques to
immediately boost your charisma in personal interactions.
Putting It into Practice: Presence

--- PAGE 22 ---
Here are a few techniques for r emaining pr esent,
adapted fr om mindfulness disciplines. All you need is a
reasonably quiet place wher e you can close your eyes
(whether standing or sitting) for just one minute and a
way to k eep track of time.
Set the timer for one minute. Close your eyes and try
to focus on one of the following thr ee things: the sounds
around you, your br eathing, or the sensations in your
toes.
1. Sounds: Scan your envir onment for sound. As a
meditation teacher told me, “Imagine that your ears
are satellite dishes, passively and objectively
registering sounds.”
2. Your br eath: F ocus on your br eath and the
sensations it cr eates in your nostrils or stomach as it
goes in and out. P ay attention to one br eath at a
time, but try to notice everything  about this one
breath. Imagine that your br eath is someone you
want to give your full attention to .
3. Your toes: F ocus your attention on the sensations in
your toes. This for ces your mind to sweep thr ough
your body, helping you to get into the physical
sensations of the moment.
So how did that go? Did you ﬁnd your mind constantly
wandering even though you wer e trying your best to be
present? As you’ve noticed, staying fully pr esent isn’t
always easy . Ther e are two main r easons for this.
First, our brains ar e wir ed to pay attention to novel stimuli,
whether they be sights, smells, or sounds. W e’re wir ed to be
distracted, to have our attention grabbed by any new
stimulus: It could be important! It could eat us! This

--- PAGE 23 ---
tendency was k ey to our ancestors’ survival. Imagine two
tribesmen hunting thr ough the plains, sear ching the horizon
for signs of the antelope that could feed their family .
Something ﬂick ers in the distance. The tribesman whose
attention wasn’t immediately caught? He’s not our ancestor .
The second r eason is that our society encourages
distraction. The constant inﬂux of stimulation we r eceive
worsens our natural tendencies. This can eventually lead us
into a state of continuous partial attention,  in which we
never give our full attention to any single thing. W e’re
always partially distracted.
So if you of ten ﬁnd it har d to be fully pr esent, don’t beat
yourself up. This is entir ely nor mal. P resence is har d for
almost all of us. A 2,250-person study coauthor ed by
Harvar d psychologist Daniel Gilbert estimated that nearly
half of the average person’s time was spent “mind
wandering.” 2 Even meditation masters can ﬁnd their minds
wandering during their practice. In fact, this is a common
subject of jok es during intensive meditation r etreats (yes,
there are such things as meditation jok es).
The good news is that even a minor incr ease in your
capacity for pr esence can have a major eﬀect on those
around you. Because so few of us ar e ever fully pr esent, if
you can manage even a few moments of full pr esence fr om
time to time, you’ll mak e quite an impact.
The very ne xt time you’r e in a conversation, try to
regularly check whether your mind is fully engaged or
whether it is wandering elsewher e (including pr eparing your
next sentence). Aim to bring yourself back to the pr esent
moment as of ten as you can by focusing on your br eath or
your toes for just a second, and then get back to focusing
on the other person.
One of my clients, af ter trying this e xercise for the ﬁrst
time, r eported: “I found myself r elaxing, smiling, and others
suddenly noticed me and smiled back without my saying a
word.”

--- PAGE 24 ---
Don’t be discouraged if you feel that you didn’t fully
succeed in the one-minute e xercise above. Y ou actually did
gain a charisma boost right then and ther e simply by
practicing pr esence. And because you’ve alr eady gained the
mindset shif t (awar eness of the importance of pr esence and
the cost of the lack of it), you’r e now alr eady ahead of the
game. If you wer e to stop right her e and r ead nothing
further, it would be well worth it.
Here’s how this could play out for you in a practical,
everyday setting. L et’s say a colleague walks into your
oﬃce, wanting your opinion on some matter . You have only
a few minutes to spar e befor e your next meeting, and
you’r e wor ried that this might tak e mor e time than you
have.
If you let your mind continue chur ning away while he’s
talking to you, not only will you feel anxious and have a
hard time concentrating, you’ll also give the impr ession that
you’r e restless and not fully pr esent. Y our colleague might
conclude that you don’t car e enough about him or his
problem to r eally pay attention.
If instead you r emember to use one of the quick ﬁx es—
focusing for just a second on your br eath or your toes—this
will instantly bring you back to the pr esent moment. This full
presence will show in your eyes and your face, and will be
seen by the person who’s talking to you. By giving them just
a few moments of full pr esence, they will feel r espected and
listened to . When you’r e fully pr esent, it shows in your body
language in a highly charisma-enhancing way .
Being charismatic does not depend on how much time you
have but on how fully pr esent you ar e in each interaction.
The ability to be fully pr esent mak es you stand out fr om the
crowd; it mak es you memorable. When you’r e fully pr esent,
even a ﬁve-minute conversation can cr eate a “ wow” eﬀect,
as well as an emotional connection. The people you’r e with
feel that they have your full attention and that they ar e the
most important thing in the world to you at that moment.

--- PAGE 25 ---
One client told me that he fr equently upset people when
he was under pr essur e or dealing with multiple r equests. If
someone came to see him, while they talk ed his mind would
wander back to whatever he had been working on, and as a
result that person felt brushed oﬀ and unimportant.
After putting some of these focus e xercises to work, he
reported, “I lear ned how valuable it was to give them my full
attention even for just a few moments, and the techniques
helped me stay pr esent in that moment. As a r esult, people
left my oﬃce feeling car ed for, special.” This, he told me,
was one of the most valuable lessons he’d lear ned fr om all
our work together .
Increasing your ability to be pr esent not only impr oves
your body language, listening skills, and mental focus, it
could even enhance your ability to enjoy life. T oo of ten when
a special moment ar rives, such as a celebration or even a
few minutes of quality time with a loved one, our mind is
running in six diﬀer ent dir ections.
Meditation teacher T ara Brach has made the practice of
being pr esent  a lifetime study . Her e’s how she puts it: “In
most moments we have a continuous inter nal commentary
on what is happening and what we should do ne xt. W e
might gr eet a friend with a hug, but the war mth of our
greeting becomes blur red by our computations about how
long to embrace or what we’r e going to say when we’r e
done. W e rush thr ough the motions, not fully pr esent.”
Being pr esent enables you to fully notice and drink in the
good moments.
You’ve just gained thr ee instant ﬁx es to use during
interactions, and thr ough practice, they can become second
natur e. Remember that every time you bring yourself back
to full pr esence, you r eap major r ewar ds: you become mor e
impactful, mor e memorable, and come acr oss as mor e
grounded. Y ou’re laying the foundation for a charismatic
presence.

--- PAGE 26 ---
Now that you know what pr esence is, why it matters to
charisma, and how to get it, let’s look at the other two
crucial charisma qualities: power and war mth.
Power and W armth
Being seen as powerful means being per ceived as able to
aﬀect the world ar ound us, whether thr ough inﬂuence on or
authority over others, lar ge amounts of money, e xpertise,
intelligence, sheer physical str ength, or high social status.
We look for clues of power in someone’s appearance, in
others’ r eaction to this person, and, most of all, in the
person’s body language.
Warmth, simply put, is goodwill towar d others. W armth
tells us whether or not people will want to use whatever
power they have in our favor . Being seen as war m means
being per ceived as any of the following: benevolent,
altruistic, caring, or willing to impact our world in a positive
way. Warmth is assessed almost entir ely thr ough body
language and behavior; it’s evaluated mor e directly than
power .
How do we gauge power and war mth? Imagine that you’r e
meeting someone for the ﬁrst time. In most instances you
don’t have the beneﬁt of an e xtensive backgr ound check,
interviews with friends or r elatives, or even the time to wait
and observe their behavior . So in most instances you have
to mak e a quick guess.
Throughout our interactions, we instinctively look for clues
with which to evaluate war mth or power, and then we adjust
our assumptions accor dingly . Expensive clothing leads us to
assume  wealth, friendly body language leads us to assume
good intentions, a conﬁdent postur e leads us to assume  the
person has something to be conﬁdent about. In essence,
people will tend to accept whatever you pr oject.

--- PAGE 27 ---
Just by incr easing your pr ojection of power or your
projection of war mth, you incr ease your level of charisma.
But when you can pr oject both power and war mth together,
you r eally maximize your personal charisma potential.
Today, ther e are many ways to be per ceived as powerful,
from displaying intelligence (think Bill Gates) to displaying
kindness (think the Dalai Lama). But in the earliest days of
human history, one for m of power was pr edominant: brute
force. Yes, intelligence was valuable, but much less than it is
today—it’s har d to imagine Bill Gates faring well in the
jungle. F ew of those who gained positions of power thr ough
raw str ength and aggr ession would have also e xhibited
much war mth. The combination of power and war mth would
have been very rar e and very, very pr ecious: a powerful
person who also viewed us kindly could mean the diﬀer ence
between life and death in critical moments. F iguring out who
might want to help us and who has the power to do so has
always been critical to our survival.
That’s why our r eaction to power and war mth is wir ed so
deep. W e react to these qualities as we do to fat and sugar .
Our ancestors survived by having a str ong positive r eaction
to fat and sugar—they aided our survival and wer e scar ce in
our original envir onment. Though they’r e abundant today,
our instinct r emains. The same holds true for charisma:
though the combination of war mth and power is far easier
for people to attain today, it still plays powerfully on our
instincts. F rom lab e xperiments to neur oimaging, r esear ch
has consistently shown that they ar e the two dimensions we
evaluate ﬁrst and for emost in assessing other people. 3
Both power and war mth ar e necessary conditions for
charisma. Someone who is powerful but not war m can be
impressive, but isn’t necessarily per ceived as charismatic
and can come acr oss as ar rogant, cold, or standoﬃsh.
Someone who possesses war mth without power can be
likable, but isn’t necessarily per ceived as charismatic and

--- PAGE 28 ---
can come acr oss as over eager, subservient, or desperate to
please.
William Gladstone pr ojected power during the 1886
elections. A high-status individual of str ong political weight
and powerful connections, known for k een intelligence and
deep knowledge, he impr essed his young dinner companion
with his power, but lack ed the war mth to mak e her feel
special.
Disraeli was also pr ojecting power . He, too, had a history
of political power, impr essive wit, and k een intelligence. But
Disraeli’s genius was his ability to mak e whomever he was
speaking with feel intelligent and fascinating. He pr ojected
presence and war mth in addition to power and was
handsomely r ewar ded for it.
Though other appr oaches to charisma ar e possible, the
combination of pr esence, power, and war mth is one of the
most eﬀective frameworks to help maximize your full
charisma potential.
Charismatic Body Language
After extensive studies, the MIT Media Lab concluded that it
could pr edict the outcome of negotiations, telephone sales
calls, and business plan pitches with 87 per cent accuracy
simply by analyzing participants’ body language, without
listening to a single wor d of content. 4
Though this may sound incr edible—how could wor ds car ry
so little weight compar ed to the body language of the
person delivering them?—it actually mak es sense. In the
scope of human evolution, language is a r elatively r ecent
invention. But we’ve been interacting well befor e this
through nonverbal modes of communication. As a r esult,
nonverbal communication is har dwired into our brains,
much deeper than the mor e recent language-pr ocessing

--- PAGE 29 ---
abilities. This is why nonverbal communication has a far
greater impact.
For charisma, your body language matters far mor e than
your wor ds do . No matter how powerful your message or
how skillfully crafted your pitch, if your body language is
wrong, you won’t be charismatic. On the other hand, with
the right body language you can be charismatic without
saying a wor d. Projecting pr esence, power, and war mth
through your body language is of ten all you need to be
perceived as charismatic.
Charisma Begins in the Mind
While you wer e reading the last paragraph, wer e you awar e
that your eyelids wer e regularly ﬂuttering in fr ont of your
eyes?
No? Y et they wer e blinking at pr ecise intervals.
Did you notice the weight of your tongue in your mouth?
Or the position of your toes?
Have you for gotten your eyelids again?
Without our r ealizing it, our bodies send out thousands of
signals every minute. Just lik e our br eath and heartbeat,
these signals ar e part of the millions of bodily functions
contr olled not by our conscious mind but by our
subconscious mind. Ther e is far too much body language for
us to contr ol consciously .
This has two consequences. F irst, because we can’t
consciously contr ol all of our body language, we can’t just
broadcast charismatic body language at will. T o get all the
signals right, we’d need to simultaneously contr ol thousands
of elements, fr om minute vocal ﬂuctuations to the pr ecise
degree and kind of tension ar ound our eyes. It’s practically
impossible. W e can’t micr omanage charismatic body
language. On the other hand, since our subconscious is
responsible for most of our nonverbal signals, if we could

--- PAGE 30 ---
direct our subconscious appr opriately, then the issue would
be solved. (Hint: we can, and you’ll lear n how .)
The second consequence is that our body language
expresses our mental state whether we lik e it or not. Our
facial e xpressions, voice, postur e, and all the other
components of body language r eﬂect our mental and
emotional condition every second. Because we don’t contr ol
this ﬂow consciously, whatever is in our head will show up in
our body language.
Even if we contr ol the main e xpression on our face or the
way we hold our ar ms, legs, or head, if our inter nal state is
diﬀer ent fr om what we’r e aiming to portray, sooner or later
what’s called a microexpression  will ﬂash acr oss our face.
These split-second micr oexpressions may be ﬂeeting, but
they will be caught by observers (r emember, people can
read your face in as little as seventeen milliseconds). And if
there’s an incongruence between our main e xpression and
that micr oexpression, people will feel it on a subconscious
level: their gut will tell them something’s not quite right. *
Have you ever sensed the diﬀer ence between a r eal smile
and a fak e one? Ther e is a clear, visible diﬀer ence between
a social smile  and a true smile . A true smile brings into play
two gr oups of facial muscles—one lif ts the cor ners of the
mouth and the other aﬀects the ar ea ar ound the eyes. In a
genuine smile, while the outer cor ners of the mouth lif t, the
inner cor ners of the eyebr ows sof ten and fall down. In a fak e
smile, only the mouth-cor ner muscle (the zygomatic major)
is used. The smile does not r each the eyes, or at least not in
the same way a r eal smile would, 6 and people can spot the
diﬀer ence.
Because what’s in your mind shows up in your body and
because people will catch even the briefest
microexpression, to be eﬀective, charismatic behaviors
must originate in your mind.
If your inter nal state is anticharismatic, no amount of
eﬀort and willpower can mak e up for it. Sooner or later,

--- PAGE 31 ---
some of your underlying thoughts and feelings will show
through. On the other hand, if your inter nal state is
charismatic, then the right body language will ﬂow forth
eﬀortlessly . Thus, the ﬁrst step in lear ning charisma—and
what the ﬁrst part of this book is all about—is developing
the various mental states that pr oduce charismatic body
language and behaviors.
We will start by gaining some insight into charismatic
mental states—what they ar e, how to best access them, and
how to fully integrate them so they become eﬀortless. Only
afterwar d will we start practicing e xternal charismatic
behaviors. L earning these skills in the r everse or der could
lead to embar rassing r esults. Imagine that you’r e giving an
important pr esentation. Y ou’re doing well, using all the gr eat
new tools you’ve lear ned, being incr edibly charismatic. And
then suddenly, someone says something that rattles your
mental focus and shak es your emotional conﬁdence. Y ou
become ﬂuster ed, and all your newly acquir ed skills ﬂy out
the window .
Striving to acquir e external charisma skills without
learning how to handle your inter nal world is lik e adding
pretty balconies to a house with a weak foundation. It’s a
nice touch, but at the ﬁrst earthquak e everything falls apart.
If your inter nal state is in tur moil, it’s har d to r emember, let
alone use, the new skills you’ve just lear ned. Charismatic
internal skills, which help you manage your inter nal state,
form the necessary foundation upon which to build your
charismatic e xternal skills.
When companies hir e me to help them impr ove
perfor mance—to help their e xecutives become mor e
persuasive, mor e inﬂuential, mor e inspiring—they of ten tell
me that their people possess solid technical  skills. T echnical
skills ar e raw brainpower, what we use to understand the
instructions for assembling fur niture. What these e xecutives
are lacking, I’m told, ar e social skills—and so people ar rive

--- PAGE 32 ---
expecting surface lessons in social graces and business
etiquette.
But what these e xecutives need ﬁrst and for emost ar e
personal, internal skills. Individuals with str ong inter nal skills
are awar e of what e xactly is happening inside them and
know how to handle it. They can r ecognize when their self -
conﬁdence has tak en a hit and have the tools to get back to
a conﬁdent state so that their body language r emains
charismatic.
Here’s a self -rating diagram I of ten draw for the people I
coach, fr om young associates to CEOs, asking them to
evaluate themselves and their subor dinates. T ake a moment
to rate your technical, e xternal, and inter nal skills in the
table below .
I often see brilliant engineers described by others, and by
themselves, as possessing high technical, medium e xternal,
and low inter nal skills. CEOs tend to self -report medium
technical and inter nal skills but high e xternal skills. And
highly charismatic people of ten rate themselves low in
technical skills but high in e xternal and inter nal skills.
While charismatic people may r eport fewer technical skills
than their peers, their inter nal and e xternal skills give them
a far gr eater advantage overall. The inter nal skills necessary
for charisma include both the awar eness of your inter nal
state and the tools to eﬀectively manage it. Chinese

--- PAGE 33 ---
philosopher Lao Tzu r eportedly said: “T o know others is
knowledge. T o know oneself is wisdom.”
What Y our Mind Believes, Y our Body Manifests
Knowing your inter nal world starts with one k ey insight upon
which all charisma is built: your mind can’t tell fact fr om
ﬁction. This is the one dimension of your inter nal world that
can help you get into the right charismatic mental state at
will, and almost instantly .
Have you ever felt your heart pounding during a hor ror
movie? Consciously, you know it’s just a movie. Y ou realize
you ar e watching actors who ar e delighted to pr etend
they’r e being mur dered in e xchange for a nice paycheck. Y et
your brain sees blood and guts on the scr een, so it sends
you straight into ﬁght- or-ﬂight mode, r eleasing adr enaline
into your system. Her e’s how it works in practice:
Think of your favorite piece of music.
Now imagine dragging your ﬁnger nails acr oss a
chalkboar d.
Now imagine plunging your hand into a buck et of sand
and feeling the grains crunch between your ﬁngers.
And now taste the diﬀer ence between lemon and lime—
which is mor e sour?
There was no sand; ther e was no lemon. And yet, in
response to a set of completely imaginary events, your mind
produced very r eal physical r eactions. Because your brain
cannot distinguish imagination fr om reality, imaginary
situations cause your brain to send your body the same
commands as it would for a r eal situation. Whatever your
mind believes, your body will manifest. Just by getting into a
charismatic mental state, your body will manifest a
charismatic body language.
In medicine, the mind’s powerfully positive eﬀect on the
body is known as the placebo eﬀect . A placebo is a

--- PAGE 34 ---
simulated medical pr ocedur e: patients given “pr etend” pills
are told they’r e receiving r eal ones; or people ar e told
they’ve r eceived a medical intervention when in fact
nothing has been done. In a surprising number of cases,
patients given these inert tr eatments still e xperience a r eal
improvement in their medical condition.
The placebo eﬀect was discover ed during W orld W ar I
when medicine stor es had run out and doctors found they
could sometimes still ease their patients’ suﬀering by telling
them that they had administer ed pain-r elieving tr eatments.
It became widely acknowledged during the 1950s as the
medical community began running contr olled clinical
studies. Thr ough much of human history, most of medicine
was in fact pur e placebo: doctors would pr escribe potions or
interventions that we now know to be fundamentally
ineﬀective. Y et people’s conditions still of ten impr oved,
thanks to the mind’s impr essive ability to aﬀect the body .
The placebo eﬀect can sometimes be r emark ably
powerful. Ellen Langer, a Harvar d University pr ofessor of
psychology, gather ed a gr oup of elderly patients in a
nursing-home-lik e envir onment and sur rounded them with
the decor, clothing, food, and music that was popular when
they wer e in their twenties. In the following weeks, physical
exams showed tighter skin, better eyesight, incr eased
muscle str ength, and even higher bone density than befor e.
The placebo eﬀect is the basis for many of the best
charisma-enhancing techniques, and we’ll r efer to it of ten
throughout the book. In fact, this is pr obably something you
already do naturally, and many of the practices will mak e
intuitive sense to you. In the following chapters, we’ll ﬁne-
tune this skill and mak e mor e powerful the inter nal
processes you alr eady use.
The mind- over-body eﬀect also has a cor responding
downside, called the nocebo eﬀect .7 In this case, the mind
creates to xic consequences in the body in r eaction to
completely ﬁctional causes. In one e xperiment, people who

--- PAGE 35 ---
knew they wer e extremely aller gic to poison ivy wer e
rubbed with a completely har mless leaf but told they’d been
exposed to poison ivy . Every single one of them developed a
rash wher e they had been rubbed.
Both the placebo eﬀect and the nocebo eﬀect play a
critical r ole in our ability to unleash our full charisma
potential. Due to the fact that whatever is in our mind
aﬀects our body, and because our mind has tr ouble
distinguishing imagination fr om reality, whatever we
imagine can have an impact on our body language and,
thus, on our levels of charisma. Our imagination can
dramatically enhance or inhibit our charisma, depending on
its content.
You’ve just gained the foundation for many of the most
powerful inter nal charisma tools, and we’ll r efer to it of ten.
KEY T AKEA WAYS
 Charisma has thr ee essential components: pr esence,
power, and war mth.
 Being pr esent—paying attention to what’s going on rather
than being caught up in your thoughts—can yield
immense r ewar ds. When you e xhibit pr esence, those
around you feel listened to, r espected, and valued.
 Because your body language telegraphs your inter nal
state to those ar ound you, in or der to be charismatic—to
exhibit pr esence, power, and war mth—you must display
charismatic body language.
 Because your mind can’t tell the diﬀer ence between
imagination and r eality, by cr eating a charismatic inter nal
state your body language will authentically display
charisma.

--- PAGE 36 ---
 In ter ms of achieving charisma, your inter nal state is
critical. Get the inter nal state right, and the right
charismatic behaviors and body language will pour forth
automatically .
* In fact, Stanfor d resear chers conducted e xperiments showing that when
people try to hide their r eal feelings, they pr ovoke a thr eat-response ar ousal in
others. 5
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 37 ---
3
The Obstacles to Presence,  
Power , and W armth
MICHEL ANGEL O INSISTED THA T he never created  his glorious
statues—he simply revealed  them. His only talent, he said,
was in looking at the block of marble and discer ning the
statue within. All he then needed was the skill to chip away
the e xcess, letting the statue emer ge. That is what this
chapter will help you do: identif y the obstacles that ar e
holding back your charismatic self .
As you now know, your mental state is critical to your
ability to pr oject charismatic body language. However, ther e
are a number of things that can—and of ten do—get in the
way of having the right mental state to pr oject pr esence,
power, or war mth. Incr easing your charisma r equir es ﬁrst
knowing which inter nal obstacles ar e cur rently inhibiting
your personal charisma potential. In this chapter we’ll tak e a
look at the diﬀer ent kinds of physical and mental discomfort
that can stand in the way of your charismatic self .
Physical Discomfort
It was a $4 million deal, and it was nearly lost because of a
black wool suit.
On a hot, sunny day in Manhattan, traﬃc is humming and
people ar e rushing along the busy str eets. Sitting at the
terrace of a r estaurant, wearing his very best black wool
suit, T om is studying the menu. A cross the table, studying

--- PAGE 38 ---
his own menu, is P aul, CEO of a company T om has been
courting for months. As they mak e their choices, the waiter
jots down their or ders, whisks the menus oﬀ the table, and
departs.
For months, T om and his team have obsessively run the
numbers and tested all possible scenarios. They know for
sure that their system would save P aul both time and
money . But for P aul, this would be a big gamble.
Implementing a new system company -wide could go
catastr ophically wr ong. What if it stops working on
Christmas mor ning, when stor es need to be operating
ﬂawlessly? W ould T om and his team be ther e for him if a
crisis hits?
Paul has decided to give T om one ﬁnal shot at convincing
him. F or Tom, this could be a tur ning point in his car eer. He’s
conﬁdent that his system is solid and that he and his team
can deliver . It’s now up to him to communicate this
complete conﬁdence to P aul.
When P aul asks about crisis situations, T om has a r eady
answer . But as he details contingency plans, he starts
ﬁdgeting with his suit, running his ﬁngers inside the rim of
his collar, and P aul can see T om’s eyes nar rowing. Is that
tension in his eyes?  Paul wonders. T om’s e xpression looks
tight and uncomfortable, and P aul starts to get a bad gut
feeling. What’s going on?
Paul was right in seeing tension in T om’s eyes and face,
but that tension had nothing to do with the business matter
at hand. W earing a black woolen suit on a hot, sunny day,
Tom was simply feeling physically  uncomfortable.
What if you had been in T om’s place? Even without the
itchy suit, imagine being on a sunny ter race in the middle of
an important conversation, and suddenly the sun starts
hitting your eyes. When human eyes ar e hit by sunlight,
they automatically tighten or nar row in r eaction. Our eye
muscles r eact in the e xact same way to this kind of e xternal
stimuli as they do to inter nal stimuli. T o the outside world,

--- PAGE 39 ---
your face will show the same r eaction to discomfort fr om
the sun as it would to feelings of anger or disappr oval. This
reaction will be seen by the person facing you, and he or
she may not know about your physical discomfort. All they
know is that they’ve been speaking with you. It would be
natural to misinterpr et your tension as a r eaction to what
they’ve just said.
In fact, that’s pr obably e xactly what will happen, because
most of us tend to interpr et events—whether they’r e
personal or impersonal—as r elating to us. T raﬃc on the way
to an important meeting can lead us to wonder, Why did
this have to happen to  me today?
Any physical discomfort that aﬀects your visible, e xternal
state—your body language—even slightly may aﬀect how
charismatic you ar e per ceived to be. When interacting with
someone, assume that he or she will feel (at least on a
subconscious level) that whatever you do r elates to him or
to her .
Physical discomfort doesn’t just aﬀect your e xternal state;
it also aﬀects your inter nal state. Some for ms of it, such as
hunger, can impair your perfor mance in multiple ways. Y ou
may alr eady know that you think less clearly when you’r e
hungry, or at least less clearly about anything that isn’t
food-r elated. Numer ous studies conﬁr m that low blood
glucose levels lead to impair ed attention as well as to
diﬃculties r egulating emotions and behavior .1 This means
that you might have a har der time getting into the speciﬁc
mental state r equir ed for the charismatic behavior you
would lik e to e xhibit.
Counteracting charisma-impairing physical discomfort is
simple:
1. Prevent
2. Recognize
3. Remedy or e xplain

--- PAGE 40 ---
The ﬁrst, and optimal, step is to plan ahead to pr event the
discomfort fr om occur ring. The classic adage “ An ounce of
prevention is worth a pound of cur e” holds true her e. As
much as you can, plan ahead to ensur e you’r e physically
comfortable. K eeping this in mind as you mak e your choices
every day is a simple way to mak e charisma easier to attain.
When you’r e choosing a location for a meeting, tak e
comfort into consideration. Ask yourself what the
temperatur e and noise level will be lik e. Ensur e that you’ll
be well fed; don’t let yourself (or your guests if you’r e
hosting) get too hungry . Think about your ener gy level, and
the ener gy level of the people with whom you’ll be
interacting. Is the meeting very early or very late? Signs of
fatigue can easily show up in people’s body language as
lack of enthusiasm.
Be sur e to choose clothing that will mak e you neither too
hot nor too cold. A void clothing that is itchy, ill ﬁtting, or in
any way distracting. Though you may not r ealize it, any
physical distraction will use up part of your mental focus
and impair your perfor mance. It’s particularly important to
ensur e that your clothing is loose enough for you to br eathe
well and fully (this means you can tak e deep belly br eaths,
not shallow chest br eaths). How well you br eathe aﬀects
how much o xygen gets to your brain, and ther efore how well
you perfor m mentally .
Admittedly, people may gain valuable conﬁdence, and
therefore charisma, fr om feeling that they look impr essive
even if their clothing is not comfortable. It’s r eally up to you
to decide: is the discomfort worth the gain in conﬁdence?
Ideally, you should wear clothing that mak es you feel both
comfortable and highly conﬁdent in your appearance. Mak e
sure you’r e not sacriﬁcing comfort in small ways that might
actually be holding you back. Y ou’re looking to get every
advantage you can, right?
One young man told me his eyes ar e so sensitive to
sunlight that even when he e xplains the r eal cause of his

--- PAGE 41 ---
facial tension, the people he’s with of ten seem to doubt his
explanation. On a gut level, they still feel ther e’s a pr oblem
between them. His solution is to assess the r oom befor e
sitting down to mak e sur e he won’t be facing the sun or to
ask to change positions as soon as the sun becomes a
problem. Because he is awar e of this pr oblem, he can tak e
action befor e it aﬀects the way he’s per ceived.
Awareness is the second step in dealing with physical
discomfort. Check in with your face fr om time to time;
notice if it is tense. This is wher e the ability to stay pr esent
will help you yet again: the mor e present you ar e, the better
your chances of noticing if your body language is showing
tension.
The thir d step is to tak e action. If you r ealize that
something has cr eated tension in your face, do something
about it.  Befor e others misinterpr et it, try to r emedy both
the discomfort as well as the misinterpr etation.
Let’s go back to that conversation on the ter race, when
the sun was in T om’s eyes. Now you know that he shouldn’t
try to ignor e his discomfort. Instead, he could act to e xplain
and r emedy the situation. When it’s his tur n to speak, he
could pause for a second, hold up a hand (the visual cue
helps), and say something lik e: “W ould you mind if we move
just a bit? My eyes ar e having a har d time with the
sunlight.”
When the physical discomfort can’t be alleviated, it’s even
more important to pr event other people fr om taking your
tension personally . Take a moment to e xplain that you’r e in
discomfort due to a particular issue. F or instance, if you’r e
feeling ir ritated by constant nearby construction noise,
explain the pr oblem. Giving voice to something will
generally allow both of you to move on fr om it.
Mental Discomfort

--- PAGE 42 ---
Though it originates entir ely in the mind, psychological
discomfort can play out thr ough our bodies as well as
through our minds. It aﬀects both how we feel and how
we’re per ceived. Mental discomfort can r esult fr om anxiety,
dissatisfaction, self -criticism, or self -doubt, all of which ar e
forms of inter nal negativity, and each of which can handicap
our personal charisma potential.
Knowing how to skillfully handle mental discomfort is even
more important than knowing how to handle physical
discomfort. This is both one of the most challenging sections
of the book and one of the most important. It may be
diﬃcult to pr ocess, but I pr omise you will beneﬁt in the end.
In fact, you’ll be much mor e powerful. Y ou will have gained
insights to put you ahead of the game, and you will have
laid a foundation of understanding upon which the ne xt
sections will build. So brace yourself, tak e a deep br eath,
and r ead on.
Anxiety Caused by Uncertainty
Have you ever had the awful feeling that you’r e just waiting
for the other shoe to dr op, and ﬁnding sometimes that you’d
rather hear bad news than be lef t in suspense? L et’s say
you’ve r ecently become r omantically involved with
someone, and all of a sudden they stop r eturning your calls.
Your brain goes into all sorts of possible e xplanations,
obsessing about why they’ve gone silent. Haven’t you ever
felt that you’d rather get a deﬁnite “It’s over ” than never
know the cause of their silence? Even though the answer
would be a r ejection, at least then you’d know .
For many of us, a state of doubt or uncertainty is an
uncomfortable place to be. R obert L eahy, dir ector of the
American Institute for Cognitive Therapy, says his patients
often report they would rather r eceive a negative diagnosis

--- PAGE 43 ---
than be lef t in suspense, even though the uncertainty would
still allow hope of a positive outcome.
Our inability to tolerate uncertainty car ries multiple costs.
It can cause us to mak e prematur e decisions. It can
handicap us in negotiations, leading us to r eveal mor e than
we should as we scramble to ﬁll the silence, unable to bear
the uncertainty of not knowing what the other person is
thinking. And most important, it can lead us to feel anxious.
Anxiety is a serious drawback to charisma. F irst, it impacts
our inter nal state: quite obviously, it’s har d to be fully
present while you’r e feeling anxious. Anxiety can also lower
our conﬁdence. Anxiety, low pr esence, and low conﬁdence
can show up dir ectly in our body language, as well as
reduce our ability to emanate war mth.
Yet if ther e’s one thing that’s certain, it’s that uncertainty
isn’t going away . Considering the ever -increasing pace of
business and technological advances as well as
unfor eseeable economic upheavals, uncertainty and
ambiguity will be an incr easingly pr esent factor of our daily
lives. Those who ar e better at handling it will gain a
distinctive advantage over others.
Imagine you’r e dealing with a diﬃcult situation whose
outcome is uncertain. Y ou envision a variety of ways it could
play out, and you strategize how to best deal with each. So
far, so good. Once you’ve thought thr ough each scenario,
the rational, r easonable, logical thing to do would be to put
the situation out of your mind and go about your day until
action is actually r equir ed.
But how many of us have felt our minds going over the
diﬀer ent outcomes again and again, r ehashing the various
plans we’ve made, r eplaying possible scenarios, mentally
rehearsing the upcoming conversations not just once or
twice but ad nauseam?
In the weeks leading up to his meeting with P aul, T om’s
mind started spinning out diﬀer ent possibilities. F irst, he
imagined a positive outcome and e xplor ed all the

--- PAGE 44 ---
ramiﬁcations this would have. He thought about whom he’d
want to call, and in what or der, to bring them into the
project. But what if the answer was negative? His mind
started to unfold the sequence of actions that would follow :
how he would e xplain the ver dict to his boss, how he would
tell his team, and so on.
For the ne xt thr ee days, T om realized both scenarios k ept
popping up in his mind, his brain r eplaying the strategies
he’d planned for each eventuality . As he dr ove to work, he
caught himself r ehearsing the conversation he’d have with
his boss to e xplain the r ejection. During work, he would
suddenly r ealize he’d been aimlessly staring out the
window, daydr eaming about how he’d announce the win to
his team. T om knew he was ignoring other pr essing matters.
He tried to stop thinking about the situation, but his mind
just k ept returning to the possibilities again and again.
The r eason T om couldn’t let go is that our minds ar e
fundamentally uncomfortable with uncertainty . The minute
our brain r egisters ambiguity, it ﬂashes an er ror signal.
Uncertainty r egisters as a tension: something that must be
corrected befor e we can feel comfortable again.
Our natural discomfort with uncertainty is yet another
legacy of our survival instincts. W e tend to be mor e
comfortable with what is familiar, which obviously hasn’t
killed us yet, than with what is unknown or uncertain, which
could tur n out to be danger ous.
It’s worth lear ning how to handle uncertainty, not just
because it incr eases charisma but also because the ability
to be comfortable with uncertainty and ambiguity tur ns out
to be one of the str ongest pr edictors of success in business.
This is what A dam Ber man, the e xecutive dir ector of UC
Berkeley’s Business School Center for Innovation, concluded
after tracking his MBA students in their car eer pr ogression.
Very few business schools speciﬁcally teach students how
to handle uncertainty . On the other hand, psychologists
have been helping people incr ease their skills in this ar ena

--- PAGE 45 ---
for decades, cr eating and r eﬁning tools for just this purpose.
When Ber man ask ed me to cr eate a pr ogram to help
business e xecutives better navigate and embrace
uncertainty, he suggested we e xamine the tools
psychologists had devised and see which ones might be
applicable within a business conte xt. I’ve since tailor ed this
toolkit for many companies in a wide variety of industries,
and its eﬀectiveness holds.
The single most eﬀective technique I’ve found to alleviate
the discomfort of uncertainty is the r esponsibility transfer .2
In uncertain situations, what we r eally want to know is that
things ar e somehow going to work out ﬁne. If we could be
certain that things will work out—that everything will be
taken car e of—the uncertainty would pr oduce much less
anxiety . Take a moment to try the e xercise in the bo x below .
If you’d rather have my voice guide you fr om start to ﬁnish,
go to the Charisma Myth W eb site:
http://www .CharismaMyth.com/transfer .
Putting It into Practice:  
Responsibility T ransfer
1. Sit comfortably or lie down, r elax, and close your
eyes.
2. Take two or thr ee deep br eaths. As you inhale,
imagine drawing clean air towar d the top of your
head. As you e xhale, let that air whoosh thr ough
you, washing away all wor ries and concer ns.
3. Pick an entity—God, F ate, the Universe, whatever
may best suit your beliefs—that you could imagine
as benevolent.

--- PAGE 46 ---
4. Imagine lif ting the weight of everything  you’r e
concer ned about—this meeting, this interaction, this
day—oﬀ your shoulders and placing it on the
shoulders of whichever entity you’ve chosen.
They’r e in char ge now .
5. Visually lif t everything oﬀ your shoulders and feel
the diﬀer ence as you ar e now no longer r esponsible
for the outcome of any of these things. Everything is
taken car e of. You can sit back, r elax, and enjoy
whatever good you can ﬁnd along the way .
The ne xt time you feel yourself considering alter native
outcomes to a situation, pay close attention. If your
brain is going ar ound in cir cles, obsessing about
possible outcomes, try a r esponsibility transfer to
alleviate some of the anxiety . Consider that ther e might
be an all-powerful entity—the Universe, God, F ate—and
entrust it with all the wor ries on your mind.
So how did that work for you? Did you feel a physical
reaction? A fter doing the r esponsibility transfer, many
clients r eport feeling lighter, or their chests opening up and
expanding. If you didn’t feel any physical r eaction or mental
relief, it may simply mean that uncertainty was not cr eating
anxiety for you. If you did feel something happen, fantastic:
you’ve just perfor med a r esponsibility transfer .
Over time, many of my clients have found themselves
returning to this technique so of ten, it becomes instinctive.
With each practice, it becomes easier to visualize, to
transfer their everyday wor ries and car es, and to enjoy the
physiological eﬀects of the transfer .
The r eason this technique works is that when pr esented
with a scenario, our brain’s ﬁrst r eaction is to consider it as
possible.

--- PAGE 47 ---
William Bosl, r esear ch scientist at the Harvar d-MIT Health
Sciences and T echnology P rogram, e xplains the implications
of a r ecent functional MRI study on belief, disbelief, and
uncertainty as follows: 3
“Our brains ar e wir ed ﬁrst to understand, then to believe,
and last to disbelieve. Since disbelief r equir es additional
cognitive eﬀort, we get the physiological eﬀects ﬁrst. And,
though this belief may last only a brief moment, it’s enough
to produce an emotional and physical r eassurance, which
can change our thought patter ns as well as help alleviate
the uncomfortable feelings.” 4 Our physiology r esponds to
visuals well befor e cognitive disbelief kicks in. In addition,
visuals short-cir cuit our cognitive cir cuits and go straight to
our brain’s emotional levels.
The r esponsibility transfer does not actually dispel
uncertainty (the outcome r emains uncertain). Instead, it
makes the uncertainty less uncomfortable. This distinction
matters. P eople will go to gr eat lengths to get rid of the
anxiety pr oduced by uncertainty, fr om making pr ematur e
decisions to for cing bad outcomes to numbing their anxiety
with mind-altering substances of various kinds. However,
the responsibility transfer works without trying to negate
uncertainty . Instead, it helps you to be less aﬀected by it,
drawing you out of the negative mental and physical states
that of ten accompany a position of not knowing. The
outcome of your situation may still be uncertain, but you’r e
no longer so anxious about it.
By pr esenting your mind with the possibility that
responsibility has been transfer red, you’r e putting to good
use the wonderful placebo eﬀect—the brain’s inability to
distinguish between imagination and r eality . As we’ll see in
later chapters, the placebo eﬀect works even when we know
we’re self -deceiving, per haps thanks to this natural
cognitive delay in disbelief .5
One of my clients used this technique just befor e stepping
on stage to give a k ey pr esentation. It had the potential to

--- PAGE 48 ---
be a tur ning point in his car eer, and he’d been feeling tense
for a week. In the hour leading up to his big moment, his
anxiety r ose and his stomach started chur ning. When the
CEO tur ned to him and said, “ All right, P atrick, you’r e up
next,” he felt his str ess level sk yrocket. He could feel the
tension in his shoulders, in his face, in his eyes.
He knew how damaging str essed- out body language could
be to his pr esentation. So he stepped out of the r oom, found
a quiet cor ner, closed his eyes, and for just thr ee minutes
imagined transfer ring r esponsibility for both his
perfor mance and how the pr esentation was r eceived onto
the shoulders of a benevolent entity . He told me that he felt
an instant r elief sweep thr ough his body fr om head to toe.
And his pr esentation was a major triumph.
Personally, I’ve chosen to believe in a benevolent
Universe, which has a grand master plan for me (and for
everything else). I’ve found this belief to suit me best; it
helps me see anything that’s happening as part of this plan.
When I r ealize that my anxiety level is rising, I of ten perfor m
a quick visualization to transfer r esponsibility . It’s amazing
to feel the instant sense of r elief and the war mth, calm, and
serenity rising. I feel my whole body r elax, and it’s as if my
whole being starts to glow .
Dissatisfaction Caused by Comparison
Imagine that it’s F riday night, and you’r e at a lar ge dinner
party with people sitting at multiple tables. The
conversation at your table is rather dull, in sor e contrast to
the last party you attended, which was gr eat fun. T o mak e
matters worse, the table ne xt to you erupts with laughter .
Wouldn’t it be natural to think, I wish I wer e at that other
table. They’r e having a much better time…  ?
Human beings ar e by natur e driven to compar e.
Whenever we have an e xperience, we tend to compar e it to

--- PAGE 49 ---
our past e xperiences, to others’ e xperiences, or to our ideal
image of what the e xperience should be. This tendency
becomes even mor e acute when we’r e presented with
several options and want to mak e the best possible choice,
seeking to optimize the outcome.
Each stage of this cycle impairs our charisma. The very
act of comparing and evaluating hinders our ability to be
fully pr esent. T rying to optimize both impairs our pr esence
and cr eates anxiety due to the pr essur e of ﬁnding the best
possible choice. And a negative evaluation can easily put us
in a negative mental state, such as dissatisfaction, envy, or
resentment.
Because this tendency to compar e is wir ed very deeply in
our brains, trying to ﬁght it can tak e a lot of eﬀort. Instead,
notice when you’r e making comparisons and use the
responsibility transfer technique to alleviate any inter nal
discomfort it may have caused.
Self-Criticism
Imagine that you’r e on your way to an important job
interview . As the hour of the interview appr oaches, your
internal critical voice attacks you with self -doubt, bringing
up memories of past failur es, past humiliations, and
inadequacies. Anxiety rises, and if you don’t know how to
skillfully handle the physical eﬀects of your inter nal critic’s
attack, your perfor mance will suﬀer . (Don’t wor ry, you’ll gain
all the tools you need to handle episodes lik e this in chapter
4.)
Few things impact people’s perfor mance mor e than how
they feel about themselves. A thletes will tell you that a bad
mental state will aﬀect their perfor mance no matter how
well pr epared they ar e physically . Psychological negativity
can have r eal physical consequences.

--- PAGE 50 ---
When our inter nal voice starts criticizing us, lashing out, it
can feel lik e we’r e under attack. Because our brain doesn’t
distinguish between imagination and r eality, these inter nal
attacks ar e per ceived by our mind just as a r eal, physical
attack would be, and they can generate an automatic
physical r eaction known as the threat response  or ﬁght- or-
ﬂight r esponse .
The eﬀects of this activation ar e well-known. Just as a
zebra r eacts to the str ess of being chased by a lion, the
human body shoots adr enaline and cortisol (str ess
hormones) thr ough its veins, and dir ects all its r esour ces
towar d crucial functions: elevated heart and br eathing
rates, muscle r eaction, vision acuity, and so forth. The body
is no longer concer ned with living ten mor e years, but with
surviving ten mor e minutes. It shuts down nonur gent
functions such as muscle r epair, digestion, and the immune
system, 6 as well as “superﬂuous” functions such as
cognitive r easoning. In other wor ds, because it’s not critical
to survival, intelligent thinking gets shut down.
David R ock, founder of the Neur oLeadership Institute,
explains that “the thr eat response impairs analytic thinking,
creative insight, and pr oblem solving.” 7 This kind of
negativity doesn’t just aﬀect our actual perfor mance, it also
aﬀects how others per ceive us.
Let’s say you’r e in a conversation. Y ou say something, and
immediately think, Oh, that was a stupid thing to say .
What’s going to happen to your face? Y ou may wince at the
thought and your e xpression may tense. As we’ve
discussed, because we can’t contr ol our body language, any
negativity in our mind will eventually show up on our face.
No matter how brief that negative e xpression, the person
facing you is going to spot it. And all they know is that while
you wer e looking at them and listening to them, a negative
expression cr ossed your face. Naturally they’ll assume that
expression was a r eaction to them—what they said or did, or
what you thought about them. This is how inter nal

--- PAGE 51 ---
negativity aﬀects your body language, and thus your
charisma, in addition to your perfor mance.
Self-criticism is one of the most common obstacles to
great perfor mance in any ﬁeld. It’s of ten called the silent
killer  of business, because so many e xecutives suﬀer fr om
it, yet so few dar e to speak out about it. I’ve hear d a variety
of people, fr om junior associates to the most senior
executives, privately admit that much of their workday was
consumed by negativity, their inner critics constantly
pointing out their failings, or pr edicting disappointing
outcomes for their pr ojects and initiatives. In some cases,
they (and I) wer e amazed that they got anything done at all,
considering that, as one e xecutive r eported, “Eighty per cent
of my day is spent ﬁghting my inner critic.”
Self-Doubt
Self-doubt, simply put, is lack of conﬁdence in our own
ability to achieve something: we doubt our capacity to do it
or our capacity to lear n how to do it. W orse, it is the fear
that ther e is something essential that we lack, something
necessary but unattainable, and that we ar e just not good
enough . In one of the manifestations of self -doubt, known as
the impostor syndr ome,  competent people feel they don’t
really know what they’r e doing and ar e just waiting for
someone to e xpose them as a fraud. Since the impostor
syndr ome was ﬁrst identiﬁed by Geor gia State University
professors in 1978, we’ve lear ned that mor e than 70
percent of the population has e xperienced this feeling at
one time or another .8 Today, we ﬁnally have eﬀective tools
to handle it (see chapter 4 ). But alr eady, just knowing the
universality of such feelings can help us neutralize their
eﬀect and r educe their power .
Interestingly, the impostor syndr ome is worst among high
perfor mers. When I speak about it at Harvar d, Yale,

--- PAGE 52 ---
Stanfor d, and MIT, the r oom goes so silent you could hear a
pin dr op. And I see the students br eathe a sigh of r elief as
they r ealize this feeling has a name and they ar e not alone
in experiencing it.
Every year, the incoming class at Stanfor d Business
School is ask ed: “ How many of you in her e feel that you ar e
the one mistak e that the admissions committee made?”
Every year, two -thirds of the class immediately raises their
hands. When I mention this in speeches, people e xpress
astonishment. How could Stanfor d students, some of the
best and brightest in the country, who’ve succeeded
through an e xhaustive admissions pr ocess and have a long
track r ecord of solid accomplishments behind them, feel
that somehow they don’t belong?
And yet this feeling is one you’ll hear echoed at every
stage of success. Michael Uslan, pr oducer of every moder n
Batman  movie, still gets that feeling occasionally when he’s
in the studio . “I still have this backgr ound feeling that one of
the security guar ds might come in and thr ow me out,” he
told me.
For some, it has been a dir ect cor ollary of car eer
progression—with gr eater r esponsibility comes gr eater
internal doubt as the cost of failur e gets higher and higher .
Bob L urie, managing partner for the Monitor Gr oup, told me
that he, too, knows what this feels lik e. “For the ﬁrst six or
seven years of my car eer, I was the poster child for the
impostor syndr ome. I was convinced that if I got into a r oom
with senior e xecutives, they would immediately ﬁgur e out I
was a fraud.”
We’ve seen the eﬀects of anxiety, dissatisfaction, self -
criticism, and self -doubt. Wher e does all this negativity
come fr om? The diﬃcult feelings we e xperience ar e a
natural by -product of one of our most useful survival
mechanisms. Negativity e xists to spur you to action, to
either r esolve the pr oblem or get out of the situation.
Feelings lik e fear or anxiety ar e designed to get you to do

--- PAGE 53 ---
something. They’r e uncomfortable because they’r e
“designed” to be uncomfortable.
There are times when the discomfort of full-blown fear is
highly appr opriate. If we wer e in life-thr eatening physical
danger, then we would sur ely appr eciate our body focusing
all of its r esour ces towar d ensuring our short-ter m survival.
However, in today’s world, few situations merit a full ﬁght-
or-ﬂight r esponse. In these cases, our instinctive r eactions
actually work against us.
Have you ever become paralyzed in the middle of an
exam or had the e xperience of stage fright? Lik e a deer in
headlights, you fr eeze, your heart races, your palms get
sweaty . You’re desperately trying to r emember what you’d
planned to say or do, but your mind is blank. Y our higher
cognitive functions have shut down.
Sometimes, under the eﬀect of str ess, the mind thinks
we’re in a ﬁght- or-ﬂight situation, declar es a state of
emer gency, and shuts down what it deems to be
superﬂuous functions. Unfortunately, that means the body is
reducing our cognitive abilities just when we need them
most. Though it may be har d to r emember this in the midst
of an anxiety attack, r est assur ed that this r eaction is an
entirely nor mal, natural one that was intended for your well-
being.
Of course, some degr ee of self -doubt can be helpful in
spurring us to action. F or instance, the impostor syndr ome
can be a gr eat motivating tool, getting us to work har der
than anyone else. But at what cost? Considering that this
kind of inter nal negativity impairs our body language, and
thus our interactions, not to mention our ability to actually
enjoy life, might it not be better to lear n how to handle the
impostor syndr ome and be motivated instead by conﬁdence
in our abilities and the joy of accomplishment?
Knowing how to handle the impostor syndr ome and the
inner critic is essential to unleashing your charisma
potential. W ith practice, by using techniques such as the

--- PAGE 54 ---
ones you’ll lear n in the ne xt chapter, you can achieve some
distance fr om inter nal negativity, and even get to a place
wher e the inner critic’s voice evok es in you only a smile or a
chuckle. I pr omise.
So far you’ve gained k ey insights about inter nal
negativity, how to r ecognize it, and how it plays out in your
mind and in your body . In the ne xt chapter, you’ll acquir e
the tools to put these insights into practice.
KEY T AKEA WAYS
 Any inter nal discomfort—either physical or mental—can
impair how you feel, how you perfor m, and how others
perceive you.
 Physical tension caused by something as simple as the
sun in your eyes pr oduces the same changes in body
language as a mor e serious discomfort, lik e anxiety or
irritation.
 Prevention is optimal: plan ahead to ensur e comfort in
clothing, location, and timing.
 Aim to stay awar e of any physical sensation of discomfort.
If physical discomfort arises during an interaction, act
promptly to alleviate or e xplain it.
 Use techniques such as the r esponsibility transfer to
reduce the feelings of anxiety, uncertainty, and
dissatisfaction that play out in your body language and
inhibit your charisma.
 Understand that mental negativity such as anxiety,
dissatisfaction, self -criticism, or self -doubt is nor mal and
something that everyone e xperiences.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 55 ---
4
Overcoming the Obstacles
YOU’VE ALREAD Y ACQUIRED  important insights about the way
physical and mental discomfort can handicap your personal
charisma potential. In this chapter, you’ll gain the tools to
put these insights into practice, sur mount the obstacles, and
successfully handle almost any inter nal discomfort. No
matter what diﬃcult feelings arise—self -doubt, impatience,
annoyance, ir ritation—you’ll be able to conﬁdently handle
them.
Skillfully handling any diﬃcult e xperience is a thr ee-step
process: destigmatize discomfort, neutralize negativity, and
rewrite r eality . Let’s get started.
Step One: Destigmatize Discomfort
Destigmatizing an e xperience means r educing its power
simply by understanding that it’s nor mal, common, and
nothing to be anxious about or ashamed of . Feeling inter nal
discomfort and negativity is a natural part of life. Everyone
experiences it.
We all feel the whole spectrum of emotions, no matter
how good we ar e. Even Thich Nhat Hanh, a monk, lifelong
practitioner of Buddhism, and the very symbol of
enlightened peace in the world, once got so angry at
someone, he wanted to stand up and slug him.
And yet somehow, in our cultur e, we’ve gotten into the
habit of viewing any physical or mental discomfort as a sign

--- PAGE 56 ---
of something gone awry, per haps even the sign of
something wr ong within us. Even during unsettling life
events—a major job change, a divor ce, death of a loved one
—when we accept a certain amount of sadness or
discomfort, we of ten put a time limit on the acceptability of
our feelings, af ter which point we believe that continuing to
feel this way would be inappr opriate.
This mindset is one of the main r easons that negative
thoughts, emotions, and inter nal e xperiences ar e diﬃcult to
handle: we feel they “shouldn’t” be happening. So not only
do we feel bad, we then also feel bad about  feeling bad.
To destigmatize, r emind yourself that this inter nal
discomfort, whatever it might be, is a nor mal part of the
human e xperience and a by -product of one of our brain’s
survival mechanisms. It helps to think of others who have
experienced what you’r e going thr ough, especially if you
can think of a person who is lik e you, but maybe just a step
or two ahead—a person you both r elate to and admir e.
If you’ve just lost a k ey client, for instance, think of
someone you know—a mentor you have a high r egard for,
or a colleague you r espect—who suﬀer ed a similar setback.
Imagine them going thr ough this e xperience. Of course,
hearing them tell you their tale of woe in person would be
ideal, but even simply imagining them going thr ough this
experience and telling you about it can be very helpful.
(Remember, your brain won’t know the diﬀer ence.)
Another way to destigmatize discomfort is to r emind
yourself that you’r e not alone in this e xperience. W ith about
7 billion people on the planet, I can absolutely guarantee
you that not just one but scor es of people ar e going thr ough
the same thing at this very moment. R ather than seeing it
as one big emotion felt by one person, see a community of
people struggling with it—one diﬃcult bur den shar ed by
many . Rather than being yours  alone to bear, see the issue
as the depr ession, the shame, the sadness that is being felt
by a multitude of people right now .

--- PAGE 57 ---
One of my clients told me that connecting himself to
others in this way is helpful and gives him the same calming
eﬀect as the r esponsibility transfer . He lik es to look ar ound
wher ever he is and imagine thought bubbles str eaming out
of people’s heads while they’r e going about their day . And
he says, “It’s r elieving to r ealize that it’s not ‘wr ong’ to be
thinking or feeling whatever it is that I’m thinking or feeling.
That it’s nor mal.”
In both my personal e xperience and in coaching clients,
I’ve found that simply adapting this new mindset and
learning how to allievate anxiety or shame can mak e
internal tur moil much easier to bear .
You see, shame is the r eal killer . Of all the emotions that
human beings can feel, it is one of the most to xic to health
and happiness. Shame r esear cher Br ené Br own deﬁnes it as
“the fear of being unlovable: Shame is the intensely painful
feeling or e xperience of believing that we ar e ﬂawed and
therefore unworthy of love and belonging.”
Shame hits us so powerfully because it conveys a
message about our fundamental acceptability as human
beings. And in basic survival ter ms, if the tribe r ejects you,
you die. It is a life-and-death situation. The brain equates
social needs with survival; being hungry and being
ostracized activate similar neural r esponses. 1 Somewher e in
the back of our minds is the fear of being so disappr oved- of
that we’d be e xcluded by those who matter to our survival.
Because it’s easily trigger ed and fast to escalate, shame
can quickly gr ow out of pr oportion and show up in ways that
are not helpful to us. I’ve hear d clients e xpress a level of
shame for having eaten a candy bar that would have been
more appr opriate for thir d-degr ee mur der.
Chade-Meng T an, Google’s Jolly Good F ellow * and a
devoted practitioner of mindfulness meditation, believes
that the tendency to feel bad about feeling bad is especially
true for good people. W e start thinking, If I’m a good person,

--- PAGE 58 ---
why am I feeling this shame? Sur ely if I wer e really good I
wouldn’t feel this way .
Knowing how to r emove the stigma of shame fr om diﬃcult
emotions and e xperiences is absolutely critical to charisma.
Often, it’s not what we feel that is the most painful—it’s our
shame  about feeling this way that r eally does the damage.
Once we see this feeling as nor mal and even something to
be expected, it becomes much easier to bear . As with any
discomfort or diﬃcult feeling, it is helpful to r emember that
shame is a standar d part of the human e xperience, and that
everyone  feels it fr om time to time.
Putting It into Practice: Destigmatizing Discomfort
The ne xt time an uncomfortable emotion is bothering
you, try this step-by -step guide to destigmatizing:
1. Remember that uncomfortable emotions ar e nor mal,
natural, and simply a legacy of our survival
instincts. W e all e xperience them fr om time to time.
2. Dedramatize: this is a common part of human
experience that happens every day .
3. Think of others who’ve gone thr ough this befor e,
especially people you admir e.
4. See it as one bur den shar ed by many . You ar e part
of a community of human beings e xperiencing this
one feeling at this very moment.
What you’ve just lear ned is how to destigmatize inter nal
discomfort, which incr eases your r esiliency to charisma-
impairing negativity . Just by gaining these tools, you’ve

--- PAGE 59 ---
raised your charisma level. These ar e important tools you’ll
be using r epeatedly thr oughout the r est of the book.
Step T wo: Neutralize Negativity
Once you’ve destigmatized the e xperience, the ne xt step in
handling inter nal negativity is to neutralize negative
thoughts. The best way to do this is to r ealize that your
thoughts ar en’t necessarily accurate at all.
Do you r emember T om’s and P aul’s e xperience at the
restaurant caused by the itchy black suit? Even when it
seems clear that someone is r eacting negatively to us, what
we’re seeing in their face might have nothing to do with us.
What’s going on that we can’t see? Ar e they hungry, sick, or
tired? Maybe they’r e in some kind of mental or physical
discomfort that they’r e struggling to manage.
The ne xt time you think you see coldness or r eservation in
someone’s face while they’r e talking to you, try to
remember that it could simply be the visible signs of their
internal discomfort. Y ou might be catching the surface
tremors of an inter nal tempest, and ther e’s a good chance
that it has nothing to do with how they feel about you or
what you’ve just said.
This r eminder helps me on a r egular basis. When I’m
involved in a conversation and I catch a tone of annoyance
or impatience in someone’s voice, or when I see a ﬂeeting
negative e xpression cr oss their face, sometimes I still feel
instinctively dismayed. It’s har d not to assume that what
I’ve just seen is a r eaction to what I’ve just said. But right on
the heels of this instinctive r eaction comes the r ecognition
that whatever I’ve seen may well be the sign of how they’r e
feeling about themselves, an itchy wool suit, or something
else entir ely.
One of the main r easons we’r e so aﬀected by our negative
thoughts is that we think our mind has an accurate grasp on

--- PAGE 60 ---
reality, and that its conclusions ar e generally valid. This,
however, is a fallacy . Our mind’s view of r eality can be, and
often is, completely distorted.
In one well-known study, Harvar d resear chers ask ed the
participants to watch a short video in which two gr oups of
people passed ar ound a bask etball. They wer e ask ed to
count the number of passes made by one of the teams.
Partway thr ough the video, a woman walk ed onto the court
wearing a full gorilla suit.
After watching the video, the participants wer e ask ed if
they saw anything out of the or dinary tak e place. In most
groups mor e than half missed the gorilla even though it had
waved its ar ms at the camera! 2
Think you’d do better? Y ou can try this out for yourself :
Right now, look ar ound the r oom and notice everything
that’s blue.
Now k eep your eyes glued to this page. W ithout lif ting
your eyes, think of everything in the r oom that is r ed.
Really. Bear with me. Give it your best try .
Now look ar ound. Do you see a lot mor e red all of a
sudden?
Why did this happen? W e have a limited capacity for
conscious attention, which constrains how much we can be
awar e of at any particular time. Of the millions of visual
inputs our eyes tak e in every moment, we consciously
perceive very few . The conscious awar eness of absolutely
everything ar ound us would be overwhelming.
To deal with this, our brain ﬁlters for r elevant infor mation
—either what it considers to be important or what we’ve
consciously ask ed it to pay attention to . Through this
process, our mind does not pr ovide us with a complete,
accurate r epresentation of r eality . Because it has to ﬁlter, it
gives us an incomplete view, pr esenting only some
elements and withholding all others.
Most of the time, the elements we’r e missing don’t
matter, and the pictur e we get is fairly close to r eality . But

--- PAGE 61 ---
sometimes our mind will pr esent us with a seriously
distorted view of r eality . And the distortion of ten sk ews
negative because the elements that our danger -focused
brain deems important ar e usually the most negative ones.
This tendency is called the negativity bias,  and her e’s how it
can play out in practice:
Mary is a young graphic designer who for the ﬁrst time is
leading a pr oject for one of her ﬁr m’s biggest clients. A few
weeks af ter the pr oject starts, she gets a call fr om Jim, her
counterpart within the client. Jim tells her : “Listen, you know
I’m your biggest fan. I’ve been raving about you and your
brilliant work to everyone within earshot. But somehow, my
boss doesn’t get it. I guess he just wasn’t impr essed when
you guys ﬁrst met, and he hasn’t gotten a chance to change
his mind.” Jim goes on to e xplain that he’d lik e Mary to be in
charge of all of his company’s design work, and that he
thinks her work is so good, he’s sur e his boss will be wowed
when he sees it again. Ther efore, he’d lik e her to pr esent
her work at the company’s ne xt management meeting.
There are many positive elements Mary’s mind could
focus on. Her client says he’s a big fan of hers, her work is
“brilliant,” and he wants her to handle all of his company’s
projects. Mary’s mind could  spend the ne xt few hours
reveling in her client’s praises, but that’s not how most
minds work. Despite the high positive-to -negative ratio,
what does Mary’s mind focus on? The one negative
element: the fact that Jim’s boss hadn’t been impr essed
with her when they ﬁrst met. If Mary gets stuck focusing on
the one negative in a very positive scenario, you can
imagine how unfortunate this could be for her conﬁdence
level, and thus her charisma level, when pitching day comes
around.
When your brain spins negative scenarios, r emind yourself
that you may not be getting an accurate per ception of
reality . Your brain might be following its negativity bias,

--- PAGE 62 ---
playing up some elements mor e than others, or omitting
some positives entir ely.
Just lik e an optical illusion that tricks your eyes into seeing
things that ar en’t r eal, your mind can e xperience thought
illusions that mak e you feel certain an inaccurate thought is
true.
Cognitive scientist Steven Hayes suggests that we see
negative thoughts as graﬃti on a wall. If you’r e walking
down the str eet and you see graﬃti, you may ﬁnd it an ugly
sight, but just because you see an ugly sight doesn’t mean
you’r e an ugly person.
Imagine str olling along the paths of your mind. Suddenly,
you notice an unpleasant thought. See it as graﬃti on the
wall. That’s all it is, graﬃti—not a ver dict on what kind of
person you ar e.
You can also see thoughts as ﬂick ers of electricity
crackling on the surface of your mind. Thoughts, in fact,
have no tangible substance: they’r e just little electrical
impulses sent fr om one part of your brain to another .
Understanding that my thoughts ar e not necessarily valid
was a r evelation for me. It took a lot of practice, but these
days, neutralizing unhelpful negative thoughts of ten
happens so fast that I tak e it for granted. It has become an
automatic r eﬂex that of ten kicks in as soon as I notice an
unhelpful thought that could cr eate inter nal negativity .
Some of my clients lik e to ask themselves, “What’s the
worst that can happen?” As Chur chill said, failur e is seldom
fatal, and just r ealizing that even the worst-case scenario is
survivable can bolster your conﬁdence. Although for some
people this can backﬁr e—imagining the worst-case scenario
increases their anxiety—it’s worth a try to see whether it
works for you.
Putting It into Practice:  
Neutralizing Negativity

--- PAGE 63 ---
Use the techniques below anytime you’d lik e to lessen
the eﬀects of persistent negative thoughts. As you try
each technique, pay attention to which ones work best
for you and k eep practicing them until they become
instinctive. Y ou may also discover some of your own that
work just as well.
♦ Don’t assume your thoughts ar e accurate. Just
because your mind comes up with something doesn’t
necessarily mean it has any validity . Assume you’r e
missing a lot of elements, many of which could be
positive.
♦ See your thoughts as graﬃti on a wall or as little
electrical impulses ﬂick ering ar ound your brain.
♦ Assign a label to your negative e xperience: self -
criticism, anger, anxiety, etc. Just naming what you
are thinking and feeling can help you neutralize it.
♦ Depersonalize the e xperience. R ather than saying
“I’m feeling ashamed,” try “Ther e is shame being
felt.” Imagine that you’r e a scientist observing a
phenomenon: “ How inter esting, ther e are self -critical
thoughts arising.”
♦ Imagine seeing yourself fr om afar . Zoom out so far,
you can see planet Earth hanging in space. Then zoom
in to see your continent, then your country, your city,
and ﬁnally the r oom you’r e in. See your little self,
electrical impulses whizzing acr oss your brain. One
little being having a particular e xperience at this
particular moment.
♦ Imagine your mental chatter as coming fr om a radio;
see if you can tur n down the volume, or even just put

--- PAGE 64 ---
the radio to the side and let it chatter away .
♦ Consider the worst-case outcome for your situation.
Realize that whatever it is, you’ll survive.
♦ Think of all the pr evious times when you felt just lik e
this—that you wouldn’t mak e it thr ough—and yet
clearly you did.
We’re lear ning her e to neutralize  unhelpful thoughts. W e
want to avoid falling into the trap of ar guing with them or
trying to suppr ess them. This would only mak e matters
worse. Consider this: if I ask you not to think of a white
elephant—don’t pictur e a white elephant at all, please!—
what’s the ﬁrst thing your brain serves up? Right. Saying
“No white elephants” leads to tr oops of white pachyder ms
marching thr ough your mind.
Steven Hayes and his colleagues studied our tendency to
dwell on the forbidden by asking participants in contr olled
resear ch studies to spend just a few minutes not thinking of
a yellow jeep. F or many people, the forbidden thought ar ose
immediately, and with incr easing fr equency . For others,
even if they wer e able to suppr ess the thought for a short
period of time, at some point they br oke down and yellow-
jeep thoughts r ose dramatically . Participants r eported
thinking about yellow jeeps with some fr equency for days
and sometimes weeks af terwar d.
Because trying to suppr ess a self -critical thought only
makes it mor e central to your thinking, it’s a far better
strategy to simply aim to neutralize it.
You’ve tak en the ﬁrst two steps in handling inter nal
negativity : destigmatizing discomfort and neutralizing
negativity . The thir d and ﬁnal step will help you not just to
lessen inter nal negativity but to actually replace  it with a
diﬀer ent inter nal reality .

--- PAGE 65 ---
Step Three: Rewrite Reality
It’s eight A.M. on a Monday mor ning and you’r e driving on
the fr eeway, en r oute to an important meeting. Y ou’ll be
giving a thirty -minute pr esentation that could change the
course of your car eer. You’re focused and calm. All of a
sudden, a lar ge black car cuts in fr ont of you, swerving into
your lane. W ith your heart pounding and your hands
gripping the steering wheel, you stomp on the brak e. Not
only did this car cut in fr ont of you without signaling, it’s
now speeding up and slowing down er ratically, nearly
causing you to r ear-end it. And then it swerves out of your
lane again, making the car to your right scr eech its tir es.
What an idiot, r eckless driver! Anger sur ges thr ough your
veins.
What happened to your body during this incident? A ﬁght-
or-ﬂight r esponse made your heartbeat accelerate, your
muscles tighten, and str ess hor mones ﬂood your system.
Now you’r e pumped up with str ess and anger . You know you
need to get back into a charismatic mental and physical
state in time for your pr esentation, but you have only a few
minutes, and you can’t get that idiot driver out of your
mind.
Once the ﬁght- or-ﬂight r esponse is ar oused, it’s har d to
quiet down. Anger is a diﬃcult emotion to ﬂush out of your
system—this is why an unpleasant traﬃc encounter in the
morning can stay on your mind for hours and sometimes all
day.
If you aimed to simply suppr ess the anger, you would pay
a high price. When people ar e induced into a negative
emotional state and then ask ed to suppr ess negative
emotions, their inter nal negative e xperience of ten remains
unchanged and they sustain elevated str ess responses in
their brain and car diovascular system. 3
But what if you happened to lear n that this appar ently
reckless driver was actually a distraught mother whose baby

--- PAGE 66 ---
was choking in the backseat, and she was desperately
trying to pull over into the br eakdown lane while r eaching
back to save her baby’s life?
Would that immediately r educe your anger?
For most people, it would.
Deciding to change your belief about what happened
(technically called cognitive r eappraisal ) eﬀectively
decreases the brain’s str ess levels. This came to light
through r esear ch perfor med at Stanfor d using functional MRI
machines. The r esear chers concluded that deciding to
change beliefs was a far mor e eﬀective and healthier
solution than attempting to r epress or ignor e emotions. 4
In most situations, we don’t know for certain what
motivates a person’s actions, so we might as well choose
the e xplanation that is most helpful to us and cr eate a
version of events that gets us into the speciﬁc mental state
we need for charisma.
Though this suggestion may sound outlandish at ﬁrst,
choosing to r ewrite your per ception of r eality is actually the
rational and smart thing to do . It can help you get back into
the right mental state to emanate charismatic body
language and can impr ove your perfor mance, too .
I ﬁrst lear ned about the r ewriting r eality technique during
a business school course, ** and it has served me brilliantly
in the years since. I always think of one night in Bogotá,
when I got a dir ect e xperience of how powerful this
technique could be.
It was four in the mor ning and I couldn’t sleep. My mind
was ﬁlled with appr ehension. In a few hours I would be
addressing the thr ee hundr ed senior e xecutives of a lar ge
multinational corporation. The CEO, who had ask ed me to
address his top management, e xpected his people to come
out of my session with both a mindset shif t and a practical
toolkit. I had ninety minutes to mak e them mor e conﬁdent,
inﬂuential, persuasive, and inspiring. And all this, in
Spanish. The pr essur e was high.

--- PAGE 67 ---
I had alr eady tossed and tur ned for hours, paced ar ound
the soulless hotel r oom, and star ed out the window at the
blinking city lights, desperately trying to ﬁnd sleep. I felt
nauseated, e xhausted, and emotionally spent. My mind was
churning, and I dr eaded the hours of insomnia I felt wer e
ahead of me.
Suddenly, the r ewriting r eality e xercise ﬂoated thr ough
my mind. Though it seemed far -fetched, I r ealized that at
this point I’d tried everything else, and had nothing to lose
by giving the technique a try . I sat down at the desk, pulled
out pen and paper and ask ed myself : What if this
unfortunate, unpleasant e xperience is absolutely perfect
just as it is—the insomnia, the nausea, the fact that this is
happening the very night befor e a high-pr oﬁle assignment?
In what way can this tur n out to be absolutely perfect for
me?
It took a few minutes, but eventually answers began to
arise. And I wr ote: “Maybe I’ll somehow do well tomor row
and come to know that even sleep-deprived, and in a
foreign language, I can still do all right. Maybe this
knowledge will be k ey someday when I’m faced with an
even mor e important assignment. And I’ll be grateful for
having had the uncomfortable e xperience I’m living thr ough
now.”
At ﬁrst, these statements felt lik e sheer delusion. But
writing them down (you’ll lear n why this is important)
opened up a little window of possibility in my mind. I
continued to write all the possible upsides of this
unfortunate e xperience. I made this new r eality as detailed
and sensory -rich as possible: describing what I said, what
the audience look ed lik e, when and how they nodded and
laughed thr oughout my speech. As the list gr ew longer, I felt
my anxiety subside. Eventually, my calm tur ned into
drowsiness, and—hallelujah—I headed back to bed, albeit
for less than an hour of sleep.

--- PAGE 68 ---
And you know what? Every bit of the slightly delusional,
impossibly good version of r eality that I’d dr eamed up the
night befor e came true. The speech went brilliantly, the
audience of senior e xecutives was enthusiastic, and the CEO
was thrilled. Nowadays, whenever my mind starts to wor ry
because things ar en’t quite perfect befor e an important
speech, I r emind myself : Remember Bogotá.
Since then, I’ve of ten used the r ewriting r eality technique
to get into a better -perfor ming mental state, and I now give
it to all my coaching clients. Not only does it work for them,
but I’ve met many other highly successful people over the
years who’ve told me they use similar techniques. One
charismatic entr epreneur told me: “I decide  to interpr et
everything favorably towar d myself . It’s not just that I’m
optimistic, I’m actually conveniently deluded.”
Why does this work? Once again, we can thank the brain’s
tendency to accept imagination as r eality . A study
conducted by the Harvar d Medical School suggests that
deception may not be necessary for the placebo eﬀect to
take hold; it may work its wonders even when people know
full well that they’r e taking a placebo .5
So when a diﬃcult e xperience arises and risks impairing
your charisma levels, rather than trying to suppr ess or
ignor e your inter nal diﬃculties, consider a few alter nate
versions of r eality . Conjur e a few diﬀer ent scenarios that
would induce you into a mor e useful mental state.
Of course, the most useful alter nate r eality is not
necessarily the most pleasant. When my publishers gave
me a year to write the book you’r e now holding, I wanted to
progress as eﬃciently as possible, avoiding the
procrastination pitfalls that ensnar e so many ﬁrst-time
authors. One author friend r eminded me of a maxim called
Parkinson’s Law : “Work e xpands so as to ﬁll the time
available for its completion.” He challenged me: “ Rather
than letting the writing pr ocess ﬁll the entir e year, try to
write the entir e book in one month. A t the end of a month,

--- PAGE 69 ---
what you have will certainly not be a ﬁnished book, but it’ll
be mor e than you would have without this self -imposed
deadline.”
This seemed sensible, so I decided to give it a try . I
imagined—as vividly as possible, with sensory -rich details—
that my publisher had somehow given me an insane one-
month deadline to write the entir e book. And I was amazed
at how fast this completely imaginary deadline became
emotionally r eal. I even felt a knot in the pit of my stomach,
a physical r eminder that the clock was ticking.
Was this pleasant? Deﬁnitely not. Eﬀective? Absolutely .
Within one month, I was able to send one-thir d of the r ough
draft to my editor . Though this was far less than a full book,
it was indeed far mor e than I would have pr oduced without
the imaginary deadline.
The k ey questions ar e: Which mental state would be most
useful in this situation? And which version of r eality would
help you get ther e? For charisma, you can use this
technique whenever a situation thr eatens your level of
warmth or conﬁdence. F or minor events, simply imagining
an alter native e xplanation is of ten enough to r educe anger
or impatience and generate compassion instead.
Putting It into Practice: Rewriting Reality
Let’s imagine that traﬃc is making you late for an
important meeting and your anxiety level is on the rise.
Ask yourself : What if this delay is a good thing? R epeat
the question a few times, and watch how cr eative your
mind can get with its answers. It might come up with
explanations lik e these:
♦ This delay is going to save my life—had traﬃc been
ﬂowing nor mally, my path would have cr ossed that of

--- PAGE 70 ---
an eighteen-wheel truck skidding acr oss the
intersection.
♦ The people with whom I’m due to meet ar e under a
drastic deadline and ar e grateful for every minute I’m
late, which allows them to work just a little bit longer .
♦ The Universe (or F ate or God), having my best
interests at heart, does not want this meeting to
happen. Ther e’s an even better dir ection things will
take instead.
When you’r e dealing with a mor e serious situation, sit
down and write out a new r eality on a piece of paper .
Writing accesses diﬀer ent parts of our brain 6 and aﬀects
our beliefs in ways that other modes of e xpression do
not. The act of committing things to writing has been
shown to be critical both in changing a person’s mind 7
and in making imagined stories feel mor e real. 8 Write in
the pr esent tense: “The speech is going well…” Or, even
better, in the past tense: “The speech was a complete
triumph…”
One of my clients describes using the r ewriting r eality
technique as follows: “ A colleague sent me a rather
sarcastic message. This immediately br ought up a host of
negative feelings, and I r ealized this was just getting me
into a negative thought spiral. So I tried the r ewriting r eality
tool. I imagined that this person was r eally lonely at the
moment. They didn’t know how to r each out, so they wer e
trying the best they could to connect. This helped me stay
in a positive mindset (good for me) and send a positive
response (good for both of us!).”
There may be times when you need to be charismatic
towar d someone you r esent. As you can imagine,

--- PAGE 71 ---
resentment is a very uncharismatic mental state that
causes high negativity both in your mind and in your body
language. In addition, it’s your body that suﬀers the
consequences of car rying ar ound this negativity . To quote
one of my favorite adages: “ Resentment is lik e drinking
poison and waiting for the other person to die.”
No matter what the cir cumstances of your r esentment,
you can indeed pr event your inter nal discomfort fr om
interfering with your charisma. But getting r elief fr om
resentment isn’t easy . This is when r ewriting your r eality can
be invaluable. The e xercise below will give you one good
way to alleviate r esentment. Y ou may ﬁnd this to be
simultaneously the most uncomfortable and the most
rewar ding of all the r eality r ewriting you do .
Putting It into Practice: Getting Satisfaction
♦ Think of one person in your life who has aggrieved
you.
♦ Take a blank page and write that person a letter
saying anything and everything you wish you had
ever told them. R eally get into this—you have nothing
to lose. Mak e sur e you write it out by hand.
♦ When you’ve gotten absolutely everything oﬀ your
mind and onto paper, put the letter aside.
♦ Take a fr esh sheet and write their r esponse just the
way you wish they would r espond. Y ou might have
them taking r esponsibility for their actions,
acknowledging and apologizing for everything they’ve
ever done that hurt you. Y ou don’t need to ﬁnd any
justiﬁcation for their actions, just an acknowledgment

--- PAGE 72 ---
and an apology . It’s your imagination, so you get to
decide e xactly what you’d lik e to hear .
This e xercise may feel alien, awkwar d, or unr eal at ﬁrst—
that’s the case for many people. And you may not feel an
immediate inter nal shif t. However, over the ne xt few days
you may be amazed to feel this “ new r eality” gradually
taking hold. Y ou may feel that you did get the closur e you
needed. T o accelerate the pr ocess, simply r eread the
apology letter nightly for a few days. Y ou’ll appr eciate the
results.
One of my clients told me that persevering thr ough this
exercise lif ted a ten- year bur den oﬀ her shoulders mor e
eﬀectively than years of therapy . Another told me that his
interactions with his business partner, which had become
increasingly diﬃcult, beneﬁted gr eatly fr om this technique.
He said:
If I had the choice, I’d never see him again. But I
was going to have to interact with him, and I knew
that if I didn’t ﬁnd a way to alleviate the
resentment, it would just stay in the back of my
mind, eating away at my attention and impacting
both my body language and my perfor mance. So I
did the getting satisfaction e xercise. A t ﬁrst I didn’t
really notice a change, though it felt good to get
things oﬀ my chest. But in the days that followed, I
felt diﬀer ent when interacting with my partner .
Though he still hadn’t apologized for his behavior,
the resentment was no longer eating away at my
attention. Because I r eally did get the apology I
needed (even though I wr ote it myself), I actually no
longer felt I needed it fr om him, and this mak es it
far easier to interact. Though it won’t mend the

--- PAGE 73 ---
relationship, it’s enough to mak e things work for
now.
By using these two e xercises, r ewriting r eality and getting
satisfaction, you can choose your per ception of the situation
—one that allows you to be both eﬀective and charismatic.
Putting It All T ogether
Now that you’ve lear ned the thr ee-step pr ocess to
overcoming inter nal obstacles to charisma, let’s put it all
together . The following r eal-life scenario will help you see
the sequence in action. It includes instructions you can use
anytime to destigmatize discomfort, neutralize negativity,
and r ewrite r eality .
Up until now, it had been a good day . Michael had put the
ﬁnishing touches on an e xciting pr oject, showed it to his
team, and everyone was enthusiastic. As he walk ed back to
his oﬃce, he was riding high. He noticed the blinking light
on his answering machine, sat down, and pr essed PLAY. It
was his biggest client, John, sounding tense, and asking
Michael to call back as soon as possible.
With those few wor ds, Michael’s stomach dr opped. “I just
had this visceral certainty that John was about to pull the
plug. T erminate our engagement. I knew I was about to lose
my biggest client. It felt so inevitable. I mean, I could hear
the tension in John’s voice.”
Michael felt certain that something had gone wr ong. But
rather than r eaching for the phone with dr ead ﬁlling his
mind and aﬀecting his voice, he stopped. You know how to
handle this,  he reassur ed himself . Then he followed this
checklist:
1. Take a deep br eath and shak e out your body to ensur e
that no physical discomfort is adding to your tense
mental state.

--- PAGE 74 ---
2. Dedramatize. R emind yourself that these ar e just
physical sensations. Right now, nothing serious is
actually happening. This only feels uncomfortable
because of the way your brain is wir ed. Zoom out your
focus to see yourself as one little person sitting in a
room with certain chemicals ﬂooding his system.
Nothing mor e.
3. Destigmatize. R emind yourself that what you’r e
experiencing is nor mal and everyone goes thr ough it
from time to time. Imagine countless people all over the
world feeling the e xact same thing.
4. Neutralize. R emind yourself that thoughts ar e not
necessarily r eal. Ther e have been many times when
you’ve been certain that a client was disappointed, only
to discover that the e xact opposite was true.
5. Consider a few alter nate r ealities. Michael consider ed:
Maybe the tension in John’s voice had nothing to do with
me. Maybe he felt har ried because he’s running late on
that pr oject he mentioned last week.
Maybe he fears that I might ter minate our engagement.
Maybe he’s wor ried that he’s not as important to me as
my other clients. Maybe he’s afraid of losing me.
6. Visualize a transfer of r esponsibility . Feel the weight of
responsibility for the outcome of this situation lif ting oﬀ
your shoulders. T ell yourself it’s all tak en car e of.
As Michael went thr ough the checklist, putting each of the
techniques to good use, he felt his tension gradually ease.
Going thr ough this sequence helped him put his initial
pessimistic pr ediction into perspective as just one of many
possible e xplanations for the tone of John’s message. W ith a
newfound calm, Michael pick ed up the phone r eady to talk
to his client with charismatic conﬁdence.

--- PAGE 75 ---
Getting Comfortable with Discomfort
You’ve come a long way alr eady. Since the beginning of this
chapter you’ve gained an arsenal of techniques to help you
overcome the most common obstacles to charisma. But
there’s one mor e thing you need to lear n. If you want to
reach advanced charisma levels, wher e the masters
operate, the ne xt tool is what will tak e you ther e. This
technique helps you get back into charisma no matter how
diﬃcult your inter nal state. It’s a bit lik e having an ace up
your sleeve. Just knowing it’s ther e for you when and if you
need it will give you a solid foundation of conﬁdence.
This technique will give you the edge in negotiations,
presentations, social situations—anytime your perfor mance
matters. It is, however, not an easy tool to acquir e, as it
requir es going against your most primal instincts. So what’s
this secr et weapon?
Being comfortable with discomfort.
Sounds simple? It is. Simple, but not easy .
Imagine that you’r e sitting in an airplane that’s stuck on
the ground, waiting in line for tak eoﬀ. Y ou’re trapped in a
tiny, cramped seat. The air -conditioning has br oken down,
the temperatur e is rising, the air is gr owing stale, and you
can feel sweat start to trickle down the back of your neck.
Just when you think things can’t get worse, an infant starts
to howl in the r ow right behind you. Y ou can feel the
discomfort building, tension rising thr ough your body,
irritation taking hold of your mind. Y our car ry-on bag with all
of your r eading materials has been whisk ed away by the
ﬂight cr ew and stowed out of r each, so you have nothing
with which to distract yourself . And you have no idea how
long this will last.  You do know that your mounting tension
serves no useful purpose. But how can you stop it?
The answer, surprisingly, is to delve into  those very
sensations of discomfort. That’s right. Though it sounds
counterintuitive, rather than trying to suppr ess, ignor e, or

--- PAGE 76 ---
power thr ough them, your goal is to give your full attention
to the very sensations you’d instinctively want to push
away .
Focusing on the minute sensations of your physical
discomfort serves a dual purpose: it gives your mind
something concr ete to focus on other than its gr owing
conviction that this situation is unbearable. It also has the
advantage of bringing you instantly into full pr esence, a k ey
component of charisma. In fact, this technique, called
delving into sensations,  can help you access charismatic
presence even during highly uncomfortable situations.
* * *
Putting It into Practice:  
Delving into Sensations
This e xercise will cr eate an uncomfortable situation and
then help you practice getting comfortable ther e. You’ll
need to ﬁnd a quiet, r elaxing spot to sit, along with a
trusted friend or colleague as your partner .
Once you start the e xercise you cannot stop to check
the instructions, so r ead over the script below once or
twice befor e you begin. If you’d rather have my voice
guiding you fr om start to ﬁnish, go to the Charisma Myth
Web site: http://www .CharismaMyth.com/discomfort .
♦ Set a timer for thirty seconds and then look into your
partner’s eyes. K eep your gazes lock ed from now on.
♦ As soon as you become awar e of any discomfort, pay
very close attention to it. Notice wher e the feelings
are located in your body . Mentally name the
sensations—constriction, pr essur e, tingling?

--- PAGE 77 ---
♦ Delve into each sensation as much as you can; aim to
feel its te xture. Describe each one as if you wer e a
chef describing a specialty dish.
♦ Let the awkwar dness build. How does it manifest
itself physically? Do you feel tightness in your jaw? Is
it tension in your stomach?
♦ Imagine yourself as a scientist investigating this
experience. Name the sensations you feel. Observe
them as objectively as you can. See them pur ely as
physical sensations, lik e hot and cold.
♦ When you feel the ur ge to laugh, talk, or r elieve the
discomfort in any way, r esist it. This is your chance to
practice delving into the sensations, not avoiding
them.
If you and your partner last all thirty seconds, pat
yourselves on the back. It tak es a str ong will to ﬁght
your instincts in this way .
Now try the same e xercise again and see if you can
increase your eﬀectiveness by using two additions:
1. Give yourself continuous encouragement.
Throughout the e xercise, r emind yourself that you’r e
doing courageous, advanced work and that your
eﬀorts will yield r ewar ds.
2. Remind yourself that this discomfort will pass, as did
all other emotions you’ve ever had befor e it. Though
it may feel unbearable in this moment, it will
subside.
An hour or two af ter doing this e xercise, check your
level of discomfort. Y ou might be astonished at how far
away it seems, even though while you wer e in the

--- PAGE 78 ---
middle of the e xperience it felt as if it would never end.
If indeed your discomfort seems distant, mak e a str ong
mental note to r emember this the ne xt time your mind
insists that an e xperience is endless and unbearable.
Robert, one of my favorite clients, is a brilliant, quick-
witted, highly eﬀective, and highly cr eative e xecutive. He’s
incredibly fast on his feet. He also has very limited patience.
For Robert, daylong company meetings wer e pur e tortur e.
He would feel the rising tide of impatience but felt
powerless to stem it. He would desperately ﬁght against the
“I cannot bear this a minute longer ” feeling, coming out of
these e xperiences with his body tied up in knots.
As far as his charisma was concer ned, the ener gy he was
using to try to suppr ess his impatience was only making
things worse. W aging this kind of inter nal war is not good for
charisma. Nor is zoning out, which would only decr ease his
presence and mak e him appear at best uncharismatic and
at worst uncaring. So I suggested he give the delving into
sensations practice a try .
Robert took this practice to heart to such a degr ee that it
became second natur e to him. Nowadays, whenever he
feels the ﬁrst glimmers of impatience, he instinctively and
immediately delves into his physical sensations. He says he
describes them to himself “as a sommelier would describe a
ﬁne vintage.” Doing this, he says, “is a very useful
technique, simultaneously distracting me fr om the
impatience while still k eeping me fully pr esent in the
moment.”
The ability to handle discomfort is a highly valuable skill.
The less discomfort aﬀects you, the fewer the situations that
can impair your charisma potential. When you know how to
handle discomfort, no situation can shak e you; whether
business or personal, ther e is no feeling that can mak e you
run away .

--- PAGE 79 ---
One CEO told me that “the most eﬀective thing you can
do for your car eer is to get comfortable being
uncomfortable.” Think of the plethora of discomforts that
come with leadership, fr om having to ﬁr e employees to
taking the heat for a team failur e, or simply enduring painful
meetings. Think of how critical it can be to handle the
discomfort of silence during negotiations. I’ve of ten hear d
professional negotiators tell me that they could accurately
predict the outcome of negotiations fairly early on using one
simple clue: whoever has less endurance for silence loses.
Try the e xercise in the bo x below to incr ease your
resilience. T o mak e things easier, consider this a new skill
you’r e practicing, rather than tests with which to evaluate
your perfor mance. Imagine that you’r e lear ning a new piece
of music or a new way of tossing a ball. Just as you lif t
weights at the gym to incr ease your physical str ength, her e
you’r e growing and str engthening your r esilience muscles.
Putting It into Practice:  
Stretching Y our Comfort Zone
Here are mor e techniques to help you br oaden your
comfort zone and build comfort with discomfort. Since
most of these involve some degr ee of awkwar dness, it’s
best to use them in low-stak es encounters rather than
with k ey clients or with your boss.
♦ Hold eye contact longer than is comfortable. One of
my students started practicing this on passengers in
passing cars while waiting at a bus stop. He said the
reactions he’d get wer e amazing, fr om smiles and
waves to honks and shouts.
♦ Experiment with personal space. Move closer to
people than you usually would in an elevator, for

--- PAGE 80 ---
instance. Notice how str ong the ur ge is to r evert to
your standar d behavior . Try not to give in.
♦ Hold the elevator door open for everyone entering,
and then get in last. Stand with your back to the
elevator door, facing everyone else.
♦ Strik e up a conversation with a complete stranger .
For instance, as you wait in line at a coﬀee shop,
comment on the pastries and then ask your neighbor
an open-ended question, such as: “I’m trying to
decide which is the most sinful: the muﬃn, the
brownie, or the cak e. How would you rank them?”
These e xercises may feel acutely uncomfortable and
perhaps a bit embar rassing the ﬁrst few times you do them.
Remind yourself that you’r e not doing anything illegal! The
only thing that’s holding you back is social customs. Y ou can
also r emind yourself that you’r e doing important personal
work, incr easing your skills and e xpanding the boundaries of
your comfort zone. And r emind yourself that, lik e every
other e xperience, this one, too, will pass. However
uncomfortable it feels, it will fade as completely as all the
previous e xperiences you’ve ever had. Y ou will also get
better and mor e comfortable with practice. So if you can
bring yourself to talk to strangers whenever you’r e waiting
around in lines, or on buses or trains, do it. Grab every
opportunity, and you’ll impr ove fast.
You can practice this technique with any discomfort,
physical or mental. Whether you’r e too hot, too cold, angry,
impatient, annoyed, or fearful, you may be surprised to ﬁnd
that some feelings you usually don’t welcome can even
become mildly pleasant.
You now have all the tools you need to get into
charismatic mental states, no matter what the obstacle. The

--- PAGE 81 ---
three-step pr ocess of destigmatizing, detaching, and
rewriting is one you can use anytime a diﬃcult e xperience
arises. Come back to this chapter whenever a situation in
your life calls for these tools until they become second
natur e.
KEY T AKEA WAYS
 To be charismatic, you must ﬁrst lear n to over come the
primary obstacle to charisma: inter nal discomfort.
 Skillfully handle inter nal discomfort with a thr ee-step
process: destigmatize your discomfort, neutralize your
negative thoughts, and r ewrite your per ception of r eality .
 Destigmatize and dedramatize uncomfortable feelings by
remembering that they ar e survival instincts and a natural
part of the human e xperience. Think of others who’ve
gone thr ough this befor e—especially people you admir e—
and see yourself as part of a community of human beings
experiencing the same feeling at the same moment.
 Neutralize unhelpful negative thoughts by r emembering
that the mind of ten distorts r eality and ﬁlters your
envir onment to highlight the negative. Think of your
negative thoughts as graﬃti on a wall—you may ﬁnd it an
ugly sight, but just because you see an ugly sight doesn’t
mean you’r e an ugly person.
 Rewrite r eality by considering a few helpful alter natives to
your cur rent perspective. F or maximum eﬀect, write down
your new r ealities by hand and describe them in vivid
detail.
 For advanced practice, delve into the physical sensations
of discomfort. F ocusing on the sensations gives your mind
something concr ete to focus on, drawing your attention
away fr om your feeling that the e xperience is unbearable.

--- PAGE 82 ---
* Yes, that’s his oﬃcial title. His subtitle, of course, r eads “Which nobody can
deny.”
** Professor Srik umar R ao’s class on happiness was one of the most popular
courses ever oﬀer ed at Columbia Business School. The admissions pr ocess for
the course was grueling.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 83 ---
5
Creating Charismatic  
Mental States
IN THE PREVIOUS  chapter you lear ned how to skillfully handle
the most common charisma-inhibiting obstacles. Y ou’re now
ready to cr eate the right mental states that will help you
reach your full charisma potential. Y ou’ll lear n how to
increase conﬁdence and how to emanate war mth and power
—two of the thr ee crucial components of charisma. Y ou’ll
also discover ways to craf t any mental state you want, fr om
serenity to triumph.
Visualization
Golfer Jack Nicklaus said that he never hit a shot, even
during practice, without visualizing it ﬁrst. F or decades,
professional athletes have consider ed visualization an
essential tool, of ten spending hours visualizing their victory,
telling their mind just what they want their body to achieve.
“Ther e is good evidence that imagining oneself
perfor ming an activity activates parts of the brain that ar e
used in actually perfor ming the activity,” P rofessor Stephen
Kosslyn, dir ector of Stanfor d’s Center for A dvanced Study in
the Behavioral Sciences, wr ote me. This is the r eason why
visualization works so well—in fact, some athletes r eport
feeling physically e xhausted af ter intense visualization
sessions. V isualization can even physically alter the brain
structur e: repeated e xperiments have shown that simply

--- PAGE 84 ---
imagining yourself playing the piano with suﬃcient
repetition leads to a detectable and measurable change in
the motor corte x of the brain. 1
The brain is e xtraor dinarily changeable: it’s constantly
rewiring itself . The pr eviously held notion that past a certain
age it becomes set in its ways has now been pr oven to be
quite dramatically wr ong. 2 Whenever we use our brain, we
ﬁre certain neur onal connections, and the mor e these
connections get used, the str onger they become. W e’re
essentially wearing gr ooves into our brain—whichever
mental pr ocesses ar e used on a consistent basis will
strengthen. Y ou can build and then str engthen whichever
mental tendencies you focus on.
Mental pr eparation techniques have also become
standar d practice in Hollywood, wher e a technique known as
Method acting is used by many of the Hollywood’s most
respected stars. Sean P enn, Meryl Str eep, R obert DeNir o,
Marlon Brando, and P aul Newman all hail fr om this school of
acting.
Method acting evolved to help actors with their most
diﬃcult task: getting their body language right. Consciously
trying to contr ol as much of their body language as possible
was both e xhausting and doomed to fail: even with years of
training, it’s impossible to contr ol the ﬂow completely . If
their inter nal emotions wer e not what they wanted the
outside world to see, sooner or later, something of these
underlying thoughts and feelings would show .
Method acting took a diﬀer ent appr oach. R ather than
having people try to contr ol their body language, it went
straight to the body language sour ce—the mind—and had
the actors strive to become  the characters they wer e aiming
to play so that they would r eally feel the emotions they
wanted to convey . Then the thousands of body language
signals would ﬂow naturally and congruently .
Because of its powerful mental and physiological eﬀects,
visualization is one of the most eﬀective charisma-boosting

--- PAGE 85 ---
tools available. The right visualization can help you incr ease
your inter nal feeling of conﬁdence as well as your ability to
project it. Just by using the right mental images, your
subconscious mind will send a r emark able chain r eaction of
conﬁdence signals cascading thr ough your body . In fact, you
can display nearly any body language just by picking the
right visualization.
The bo x below is a step-by -step guide to visualization that
you can use whenever you want to change your inter nal
state. Y ou’ll practice visualizing conﬁdence her e, but later in
the book you’ll ﬁnd other useful e xercises for visualizing
warmth and empathy, or calm and ser enity.
Putting It into Practice: V isualization
The following visualization is a gr eat tool to incr ease the
amount of power you want to convey . You can try this
exercise at home on the couch, at work sitting at your
desk, or even in an elevator—whenever you have an
opportunity to close your eyes for a minute.
♦ Close your eyes and r elax.
♦ Remember a past e xperience when you felt
absolutely triumphant—for e xample, the day you won
a contest or an awar d.
♦ Hear  the sounds in the r oom: the mur murs of
approval, the swell of applause.
♦ See people’s smiles and e xpressions of war mth and
admiration.
♦ Feel your feet on the gr ound and the congratulatory
handshak es.

--- PAGE 86 ---
♦ Above all, experience  your feelings, the war m glow of
conﬁdence rising within you.
Do you feel mor e conﬁdent? Some people e xperience
very str ong r esults fr om their ﬁrst visualization and
others less. But, as with any other skill, your ability to
create r ealistic visualizations will impr ove with practice.
The ne xt time you do this e xercise, aim to cr eate
images that ar e even mor e detailed. Guided imagery
must be pr ecise, vivid, and detailed to be eﬀective, says
Harvar d-trained visualization specialist Stephen Krauss.
When visualization is used with Olympic ski teams,
skiers visualize themselves car eening thr ough the entir e
course, feeling their muscles tensing, e xperiencing each
bump and tur n in their minds.
Some people ﬁnd it simple to think thr ough a visualization
scenario . However, others ar e mor e sensitive to auditory
cues, so her e’s an alter native to visualization: select k ey
phrases to mentally focus on. My clients have found a wide
variety of phrases useful, so her e are a few e xamples, which
could help you access calm and ser enity. They run the
gamut of tastes and styles, so you may ﬁnd that some raise
your hackles while others str ongly r esonate:
A week fr om now, or a year fr om now, will any of this
matter?
This, too, shall pass. Y es, it will.
Look for little miracles unfolding right now .
Love the confusion.
What if you could trust the Universe, even with this?
Axioms lik e these can be a saving grace in moments of
panic, when our brain goes blank and all we can r emember
are simple phrases. Beginning white-water raf ters ar e

--- PAGE 87 ---
taught an easy r hyme to r emember—“toes to nose”—to
remind them of the sequence of moves they should e xecute
if the boat ﬂips over . Even veteran ﬁr eﬁghters sometimes
fall back on a mantra lik e “Put the white stuﬀ on the r ed
stuﬀ” to snap them into action during a ﬁr e.
You can also add r eal sensory input to your visualizations.
For instance, play music while you verbalize or subvocalize,
choosing songs that you know mak e you feel especially
energized and conﬁdent. Movie themes seem to be
particularly useful. The e xecutives I coach of ten mention the
musical scor es from Rocky III (“Eye of the T iger”), Chariots
of Fire (instrumental by V angelis), or Top Gun  (“Top Gun
Anthem”). My personal soundtrack comes fr om the movie
Peter P an: “Flying,” by James Newton Howar d. Don your
headphones and let the music of your choice set the mood
for whatever mental state you want to achieve.
If you’r e ready to go all out, add movement to mak e your
visualizations r each an entir ely new level. Because
physiology aﬀects psychology (yes, your body aﬀects your
mind—mor e on this in the ne xt chapter), cr eating certain
movements or postur es can bring up speciﬁc emotions in
your mind.
Try to think of what gestur e you tend to mak e when you
achieve something, lik e a good golf shot, or when you get
really good news. Is it the classic ﬁst pump? Or maybe you
raise both ar ms in the air and shout “YES!” By adding this
particular gestur e (and wor ds, if any) to the end of your
visualization, when your conﬁdence is soaring, you’ll engage
your entir e physiology and “lock in ” the triumphant feeling,
maximizing the eﬀect of the e xercise.
With all of these dimensions—visual, auditory, kinesthetic
—keep r eﬁning as you go along. If you feel that a particular
image, phrase, movement, or song works well, tweak it a
little and observe how that aﬀects the r esults. Notice what
happens when you zoom in on visual details, sounds, or
sensations. Whether you’r e hearing encouraging voices or

--- PAGE 88 ---
feeling the war mth of the sun, k eep making small changes.
The combination of sights and sounds that works best for
me has changed considerably over the years.
Visualization is truly a miracle method, helping you boost
conﬁdence, emanate mor e war mth, r eplace anxiety with
calm ser enity, or gain access to whichever emotion you’d
like to feel and then br oadcast it thr ough your body
language. In fact, it’s worth taking the time to develop and
practice a go -to visualization to eﬀectively help you r egain
calm and conﬁdence. That way, during times of str ess, you
won’t need to come up with new imagery on the ﬂy . You’ll
already know what works for you.
Here are three mor e visualizations to use when you want
a charisma boost befor e giving a pr esentation, attending a
key meeting, or anytime you’r e feeling anxious.
Just before giving a presentation:  Some of this
century’s best-known speak ers report using some version of
visualization just befor e stepping into the spotlight. In fact,
it would be unusual to ﬁnd a gr eat speak er who doesn’t.
When clients ask me if they should use visualization befor e
an important speech, I answer, “ Only if you want it to go
really well!”
After ﬁf teen years of speaking pr ofessionally, I ﬁnd that
doing even thirty seconds of visualization mak es a
substantial diﬀer ence to my perfor mance. It gr eatly aﬀects
how charismatic I am on stage. In fact, every time I don’t
run thr ough a visualization just befor e stepping on stage, I
regret it. Even when I know the speech so well I could say it
backwar d, it’s worth using visualization to ensur e that I get
into the right charismatic mental state.
To mak e the visualization most eﬀective, I try to ar rive at
the venue early so that I can walk ar ound the stage and get
comfortable with the space. I tak e the right music along with
me and start the visualizations right ther e on stage, aiming
to link conﬁdent, triumphant feelings to being in that
particular envir onment. While listening to an uplif ting,

--- PAGE 89 ---
energizing soundtrack, I cr eate mental movies, vividly
imagining how splendidly the speech is going, seeing and
hearing the audience’s enthusiastic r esponse as I
conﬁdently move acr oss the stage.
A few minutes befor e I’m due to walk out under the
spotlights, I hide away in an unoccupied r oom (this is such a
common practice for actors, politicians, speak ers, and all
other perfor mers that a special r oom called the green r oom
is often reserved for just this purpose) and run thr ough my
visualization, dancing ar ound (yes, I’m serious) to my
personal soundtrack.
Before important meetings:  One of the most
impressive young businesswomen I know seems to always
ﬂoat on a cloud of conﬁdence, and things somehow always
go well for her . When Silvia goes to pitch a deal, people who
know her tak e for granted that she’ll win the day .
Silvia r ecently conﬁded that visualization is one of the
secrets to her success. Befor e key meetings, she’ll imagine
“the smiles on their faces because they lik ed me and they
are conﬁdent about the value I’m bringing them. I’ll imagine
as much detail as I can, even seeing the wrinkles ar ound
their eyes as they’r e smiling.” She visualizes the whole
interaction, all the way thr ough to the ﬁr m handshak es that
close the meeting, sealing the deal.
I’ve even found visualization helpful befor e writing
important e-mails. Just as the right visualization helps you
get into the right body language so that the right signals
ﬂow eﬀortlessly, you can use visualization to get into
speciﬁc emotional or mental states so that the right wor ds
ﬂow as well.
If, for instance, your message needs to communicate
warmth, caring, and empathy, you’ll have a far easier time
ﬁnding the right wor ds if you can get yourself into a war m
and empathetic state. V isualizing a scene that brings up
these feelings—imagining a young child coming to tell you

--- PAGE 90 ---
her tr oubles at school—will help prime your mind for the
right language to ﬂow .
Anytime you’re feeling anxious:  The sur est way to feel
better when you’r e feeling anxious is to ﬂood your system
with o xytocin. Of ten called the neuropeptide of trust,
oxytocin instantly r everses the ar ousal of the ﬁght- or-ﬂight
response.
One of my favorite neur oscience r esour ces, the Wise Brain
Bulletin,  suggested that a twenty -second hug is enough to
send o xytocin coursing thr ough your veins, and that you can
achieve the same eﬀect just by imagining  the hug. So the
next time you’r e feeling anxious, you might want to imagine
being wrapped up in a gr eat big hug fr om someone you car e
about.
Time and time again, my clients ar e astounded by how
eﬀective these techniques ar e. “V isualization techniques
have saved lives at MIT,” one r ecent graduate told me. This
famously high-achieving institution is also known for high
rates of suicide, especially during ﬁnal e xams (MIT’s suicide
rate during the period was 38 per cent higher than
Harvar d’s, for instance 3). The MIT Health Center now
distributes visualization CDs to students during ﬁnal e xams.
One client called visualization techniques “ real-life Jedi
mind tricks.” Another told me that while he’d always used
visualization techniques in sports and music, he had never
thought to apply the same techniques to business and daily
life and was astounded at the r esults (and kicking himself
for not having thought of it sooner).
Nineteenth-century author Napoleon Hill would r egularly
visualize nine famous men as his personal counselors,
including R alph W aldo Emerson, Thomas Edison, Charles
Darwin, and Abraham Lincoln. He wr ote: “Every night… I
held an imaginary council meeting with this gr oup whom I
called my ‘Invisible Counselors.’… I now go to my imaginary
counselors with every diﬃcult pr oblem that confr onts me
and my clients. The r esults ar e often astonishing.”

--- PAGE 91 ---
Choose your own counselors accor ding to which emotions
they embody for you. Hill’s chosen self -conﬁdence counselor
was Napoleon Bonaparte. T o boost your charisma, choose
ﬁgures who r epresent complete self -conﬁdence, or war mth
and caring, or calm and ser enity. Or you might even ﬁnd
some ﬁgur es who embody all the elements at once.
Visualize yourself going to these ﬁgur es for a “pep talk”
anytime you feel you need one. Thanks to the brain’s
wonderful placebo r esponse, this will pr oduce eﬀects even if
it doesn’t feel r eal.
Visualization is indeed a powerful tool. Of all the charisma-
boosting techniques, this is the one I r ecommend making a
permanent part of your toolkit. If you gain nothing else fr om
this book, this one technique will mak e a critical diﬀer ence
to your charisma.
Gratitude, Goodwill, and Compassion
Warmth is one of the k ey components of charismatic
behavior . It can mak e people lik e you, trust you, and want to
help you. Unfortunately, for many people, war mth isn’t an
obvious, easy feeling to access; it just doesn’t come
naturally . Many of my clients conﬁde in their ﬁrst session
that they ar en’t quite sur e what war mth should feel lik e. In
fact, I of ten hear new clients wor ry: “But what if deep down
I’m actually heartless? What if I just can’t  access war mth?”
The good news is I can absolutely guarantee that you’r e not
heartless, and I know for sur e that anyone can lear n to
better e xpress war mth.
Warmth is diﬃcult for a lot of us. This could stem fr om any
number of r easons—upbringing, childhood, cur rent
envir onment, or just personality . Warmth certainly wasn’t
natural for me when I enter ed this ﬁeld. T o experience
warmth, I had to use every tool in the book—every single
tool you’r e about to discover . You’re going to get a thr ee-

--- PAGE 92 ---
step gradual transition into war mth, fr om the least personal
to the most personal.
The ﬁrst step is to get in touch with war mth dir ected
towar d life in general, and your life in particular . This falls
under the general category of gratitude. Gratitude has a
special advantage for those of us who sometimes ﬁnd it
uncomfortable to connect with others. It can give us
charismatic war mth without having to connect with anyone.
Then you’ll e xperiment with war mth towar d others—these
are the r ealms of goodwill, altruism, compassion, and
empathy .
Last, you’ll e xplor e what seems to be, for most of us, the
least comfortable kind of war mth: war mth for yourself . This
is the emer ging discipline of self -compassion.
Any of these will bring you a measurable incr ease in
charisma, so play ar ound with all of them if you can, both
those that feel natural and those that feel lik e a str etch.
Step One: Gratitude and Appreciation
What’s the opposite of gratitude? R esentment, neediness,
and desperation—none of which is very charismatic. W e all
know that few things will ruin someone’s chances mor e than
giving oﬀ an impr ession of desperation, whether they’r e on
a job interview or on a date. Gratitude is a gr eat antidote to
all of these negative feelings because it comes fr om
thinking of things you already have —from material items or
experiences to cherished r elationships. Gratitude can be a
great charisma conduit, bringing you back to the pr esent
and giving you immediate access to feelings of both
conﬁdence and war mth.
Everyone seems to be pr eaching gratitude these days.
Oprah champions an “attitude of gratitude,” and studies
have come out showing that gratitude helps you live longer,
healthier, and even happier .4 The science is compelling, as

--- PAGE 93 ---
are the ways in which gratitude can boost your charisma. If
you can access gratitude, an instant change will sweep
through your body language fr om head to toe: your face will
soften, your whole body will r elax. Y our body language will
emanate both war mth and a particular gr ounded conﬁdence
that people will ﬁnd very appealing.
But few of us can simply decide to get into a state of
gratitude. In fact, for most people, gratitude doesn’t come
easy. Human beings ar e instinctively wir ed for hedonic
adaptation : the tendency to tak e our blessings for granted. 5
Telling yourself that you should be grateful is of ten
counterpr oductive, as it only brings up guilt. Clients
complain that when someone tells them “Y ou should be
grateful,” it only mak es them feel worse: either r esentful or
guilty for not being grateful.
One way to invok e a sense of gratitude is to focus on little
things that ar e physically pr esent. During a r ecent lunch
meeting at a r estaurant, for instance, I focused on little
delights: the sun str eaming thr ough the window; blue skies;
that the waiter got my or der right; or the e xistence,
availability, and wonders of k etchup.
Another good gratitude-enhancing tool is to view your life
through a thir d-person lens, writing a nar rative about
yourself cast in a positive light.
For instance, Mary, whom we met earlier, wr ote: “Mary
has a pr etty gr eat life, r eally. She has a steady sour ce of
income. When so many others endur e physical labor or
can’t ﬁnd work, she gets to go to an oﬃce wher e she is
treated decently and many colleagues r espect her . She’s
well lik ed and appr eciated by her friends and family . Many
people truly car e about her . She’s of ten been a good friend.
In several instances, she chose to be ther e for someone who
needed her . And she’s done decently well today : completed
a full r eport, e xpressed appr eciation for a colleague’s help,
even went to the gym.” It doesn’t have to be pr ofound.
Positive things lik e the ones Mary mentioned, which ar e

--- PAGE 94 ---
small but signiﬁcant in our lives, ar e great choices to be
grateful for .
This is one of the many cases wher e the act of writing
makes a critical diﬀer ence to the e xercise’s eﬀectiveness. It
makes the positive perspective feel mor e real, mor e solid. If
you simply imagine how someone else would see your life, it
may not feel r eal at all, losing its substance and weight.
Wher eas if you write it out, even if it feels odd at ﬁrst, by
the end of the paragraph it’ll feel oddly r eal.
Follow the e xercises in the bo x below to try these
approaches for yourself .
Putting It into Practice: Gratitude
Focus on the present:  The ne xt time you ﬁnd yourself
annoyed at some minor thing, r emember that letting
your mind focus on the annoyance could impair your
body language. T o counter this, follow the suggestions
below :
♦ Sweep thr ough your body fr om head to toe and ﬁnd
three abilities you appr ove of . You could be grateful
that you have feet and toes that allow you to walk.
You might appr eciate your ability to r ead. T ry it right
now:
♦ Scan your envir onment. L ook ar ound and ﬁnd thr ee
pleasant sights—even the smallest ones. Maybe you
can see the sk y and appr eciate its shades of color .
Perhaps you can notice the te xture of the table you’r e

--- PAGE 95 ---
sitting at or even the paper right in fr ont of you. T ry it
right now :
Use a third-person lens:  For this technique, you’ll
need just a few minutes to sit down, a pen, and some
paper .
♦ Start to describe your life as if you wer e an outside
observer, and focus on all the positive aspects you
can think of .
♦ Write about your job—the work you do and the
people you work with. Describe your personal
relationships and the good things friends and family
members would say about you. Mention a few positive
things that have happened today and the tasks you
have alr eady accomplished.
♦ Take the time to write down this nar rative. Just
thinking about it won’t be as eﬀective.
Imagine your own funeral:  The last gratitude-
enhancing technique, used in many highly r egarded
leadership seminars despite its outlandishness, is the
most intense—do not tak e it lightly .
Have you ever felt ﬂooded with r elief af ter ﬁnding an
important item you thought had been lost or stolen? (It
happens to me every time I lose my k eys.) This
instinctive sweeping sense of gratitude can be
remark ably powerful, and it taps into wells of gratitude
deeper than almost any other practice.

--- PAGE 96 ---
You can manufactur e this gratitude-pr oducing sense of
relief by imagining your own funeral. W ithin seconds,
this visualization can bring you into a state of emotional
aliveness and, as you r ealize you still have your life, to a
state of gratitude.
The main point of this e xercise is to help you gain
access to various shades of war mth and give you a
chance to get comfortable with these feelings.
This is one of the few e xercises that can fairly
eﬀectively help you feel gratitude for life. It can be very
moving, bring you gr eat insights, and give you clarity on
deeply held values, but it can also mak e you feel quite
stirred up. So for this one, please ensur e that you’r e in
an envir onment wher e you would feel comfortable being
emotional. I of ten recommend doing this at home. Give
yourself time to get into the e xercise, time to
experience it, and time to come out and pr ocess it. As
with all visualizations, it’s worth getting as detailed as
you can—get all ﬁve senses involved. If you’d pr efer to
have my voice guiding you thr ough the pr ocess, you’ll
ﬁnd an audio r ecording online at
http://www .CharismaMyth.com/funeral .
♦ Sit or lie down, close your eyes, and set the scene.
Wher e is your funeral being held? What day of the
week, what time of day? What is the weather lik e? See
the building wher e the cer emony is being held. See
people ar riving. Who’s coming? What ar e they
wearing? Now move into the building and look ar ound
inside. Do you see ﬂowers? If so, smell the ﬂowers’
scent heavy on the air . See people coming thr ough
the door . What ar e they thinking? What kind of chairs
are they sitting in? What do these chairs feel lik e?
♦ Your funeral starts. Think of the people you car e most
about or whose opinions matter most to you. What ar e

--- PAGE 97 ---
they thinking? See them stepping up one af ter
another and delivering their eulogy . What ar e they
saying? What r egrets do they have for you? Now
think: What would you lik e them to have said? What
regrets do you have for yourself?
♦ See people following your coﬃn to the cemetery and
gathering ar ound your grave. What would you lik e to
see written on your tombstone?
♦ Almost everyone, of all ages, genders, and seniority
levels, gets a bit teary -eyed by the end. Y ou might feel
moved, touched, stir red. Stay with these emotions as
much as you can and aim to get comfortable with
them.
So this is how you can access gratitude for life. Gratitude
is both a gr eat ﬁrst step towar d war mth and a solid
technique to get back into a good mental state even in the
midst of a diﬃcult situation. Simply considering the
possibility of gratitude or looking for small things to
appreciate will send a positive change sweeping thr ough
your body language. As an added bonus, it may also
increase your sense of security and conﬁdence, thus
improving your mental perfor mance.
Step T wo: Goodwill and Compassion
Have you ever been with someone who you felt truly had
your best inter ests at heart? How did that feel? Y ou lik ely
experienced nice, war m feelings. Goodwill is a highly
eﬀective way both to pr oject warmth and to cr eate a feeling
of war mth in others. When you truly focus on someone’s
well-being, you feel mor e connected to them, it shows

--- PAGE 98 ---
across your face, and people per ceive you as someone full
of war mth. Y our charisma quotient soars.
Goodwill is the second step on the r oad to accessing
warmth and, ultimately, charisma. Using goodwill in your
daily interactions can instantly infuse your body language
with mor e war mth, kindness, car e, and compassion—all very
charismatic qualities.
I’ve of ten hear d people say of meeting the highly
charismatic Bill Clinton: “ He mak es you feel lik e you’r e the
only person in the world for him.” I know that every time I
get myself into a state of goodwill, I feel an instant shif t in
the interaction; people immediately war m up and seem to
like me mor e.
Goodwill impr oves how you feel as it ﬂoods your system
with o xytocin and ser otonin, both wonderful feel-good
chemicals. In addition, in an inter esting way, it lessens our
need to mak e the interaction succeed. When our only aim is
to broadcast goodwill, it tak es the pr essur e oﬀ. W e’re no
longer striving, struggling, pushing for things to go in a
certain dir ection. And since we’r e less concer ned about how
the interaction goes, we can both feel and pr oject mor e
charismatic conﬁdence.
Goodwill is the simple state of wishing others well. Y ou can
think of it as a mental muscle that can be str engthened
through practice. Even if your goodwill muscles have
atrophied, you can still build them back up. A r ecent study
from the W iseman Institute using functional MRI scans
showed that these positive states could be lear ned, just lik e
playing a musical instrument or being pr oﬁcient at a sport.
The scans r evealed that the cor responding brain cir cuits
were “dramatically changed” thr ough training.
One simple but eﬀective way to start is to try to ﬁnd thr ee
things you lik e about the person you want to feel goodwill
towar d. No matter whom it is you’r e talking to, ﬁnd thr ee
things to appr eciate or appr ove of—even if these ar e as
small as “their shoes ar e shined” or “they wer e on time.”

--- PAGE 99 ---
When you start sear ching for positive elements, your mental
state changes accor dingly and then sweeps thr ough your
body language.
Below ar e mor e intense goodwill e xercises to e xperiment
with. F or some people, they work instantly . For others, they
feel alien. Just try them out—if these don’t work for you,
we’ll have others for you to e xperiment with.
First, a visualization. This one comes fr om neur oscientist
Dr. Privahini Bradoo, a highly charismatic person whose
radiating war mth and happiness I’ve long admir ed. I was
grateful when she shar ed one of her secr ets with me: in any
interaction, imagine the person you’r e speaking to, and all
those ar ound you, as having invisible angel wings.
This can help shif t your perspective. If even for a split
second you can see someone as a fundamentally good
being, this will sof ten and war m your emotional r eaction
towar d them, changing your entir e body language. So give it
a try: as you’r e walking ar ound, or driving ar ound, see
people with angel wings walking and driving. It’s worth
imagining yourself with wings, too . Imagine that you’r e all a
team of angels working together, all doing your
wholehearted best. Many of my coaching clients (even
hardened senior e xecutives) have told me how
extraor dinarily eﬀective this visualization has been for
them. They can instantly feel mor e inter nal pr esence and
warmth, and I can see a gr eat incr ease in the amount of
both pr esence and war mth that their body language
projects.
If you r espond better to auditory guides, try a few
diﬀer ent phrases. F or instance, while looking at someone,
think, I like you. And I lik e you just for you.  Or try to
remember this guideline: Just love as much as you can fr om
wher ever you ar e. Remind yourself of these maxims several
times a day, and notice the shif t this can mak e in your mind
and body . Another saying people of ten ﬁnd equally eﬀective:

--- PAGE 100 ---
Of all the options open to me right now, which one would
bring the most love into this world?
For some people, these thr ee techniques ar e all they need
to feel goodwill and, thus, charisma-enhancing war mth. F or
them, simply focusing on wishing others well helps them to
access war mth. F or others, it may not be enough. P erhaps
the person we’d lik e to show goodwill towar d is being
cantank erous. P erhaps we’r e feeling annoyed or r esentful
towar d them. Or per haps they just feel too r emote.
In these cases, try going a step beyond goodwill to
empathy and compassion.
Goodwill means that you wish someone well without
necessarily knowing how they’r e feeling.
Empathy means that you understand what they feel;
perhaps you’ve had a similar e xperience in the past.
Compassion is empathy plus goodwill: you understand
how they feel, and you wish them well.
Paul Gilbert, one of the main r esear chers in the ﬁeld of
compassion, describes the pr ocess of accessing compassion
as follows: ﬁrst comes empathy,  the ability to understand
what someone is feeling, to detect distr ess; second,
sympathy,  being emotionally moved by distr ess; and thir d,
compassion,  which arises with the desir e to car e for the
well-being of the distr essed person.
The good news is that we have a natural tendency for
compassion; it’s pr ofoundly har dwired into our brains, even
deeper and mor e strongly than cognitive abilities.
Neur opsychologist Rick Hanson asserts that humans ar e by
far the most empathetic species on the planet. Y ou can think
your way into compassion even if you don’t naturally feel it,
Hanson assur es us.
Your willingness  to focus on others’ well-being is all you
need to positively change your body language. This will be

--- PAGE 101 ---
enough to give people the feeling that you r eally car e about
them, and is one of the cor e components of charisma.
You lear n to swim by swimming. And you lear n to be
compassionate by practicing compassion, even if it feels
awkwar d at ﬁrst. T ry the e xercise on the following page to
grow your capacity for compassion.
* * *
Putting It into Practice: Compassion
Goodwill and compassion give you war mth to balance
your power, and can save you fr om appearing
overconﬁdent or, worse, ar rogant. They can also be a
stealth tool, a silver bullet that tur ns ar ound diﬃcult
conversations.
Take the thr ee steps below to practice compassion for
someone you know :
1. Imagine their past. What if you had been bor n in
their cir cumstances, with their family and
upbringing? What was it lik e growing up in their
family situation with whatever they e xperienced as
a child? It’s of ten said that everyone you meet has
stories to tell, and that everyone has a few that
would br eak your heart. Consider also that if you
had e xperienced everything they have e xperienced,
perhaps you would have tur ned out just lik e they
have.
2. Imagine their pr esent. R eally try to put yourself in
their shoes right now . Imagine what it feels lik e to
be them today . Put yourself in their place, be in their
skin, see thr ough their eyes. Imagine what they

--- PAGE 102 ---
might be feeling right now—all the emotions they
might be holding inside.
3. If you r eally need compassion dynamite, look at
them and ask: What if this wer e their last day alive?
You can even imagine their funeral. Y ou’re at their
funeral, and you’r e ask ed to say a few wor ds about
them. Y ou can also imagine what you’d say to them
after they’d alr eady died.
Though it may feel awkwar d, uncomfortable, or downright
mushy, goodwill and compassion truly ar e valuable business
skills—even in ﬁelds as dry as accounting. F or Tom Schir o,
one of the k ey executives at Deloitte, compassion is one of
the top thr ee qualities he seeks when evaluating potential
leaders, and he sees it as a cor e tenet of charisma. Angel
Martinez, chair man of the multinational conglomerate
Deck ers Outdoors, agr ees. “Embedded in the notion of
charisma is empathy,” he told me. “I don’t see how you can
be an eﬀective leader without this ability .”
So that’s how you can eﬀectively access goodwill and
compassion for others. Now let’s look at the most personal,
and of ten the most challenging, for m of compassion:
compassion for yourself .
Step Three: Self -Compassion
Helen was clearly very bright. She could mak e forceful and
persuasive ar guments, and she came acr oss as or ganized,
trustworthy, and a good listener, intensely focused on what
people wer e saying. But she wasn’t charismatic, and she
realized it. “I know I’m interesting, ” she told me. “I’m a good
listener, and a good conversationalist. But I don’t think I’m
likable,  and I’m deﬁnitely not charismatic.”

--- PAGE 103 ---
Helen had plenty of self -conﬁdence. So what was she
lacking? W armth. P eople wer e impr essed by how much she
knew, but they didn’t feel car ed for . Helen couldn’t emanate
warmth because she had a har d time feeling it—whether for
others or for herself . Instead, she usually felt a little
alienated, disconnected. In our ﬁrst meeting together, she
very sincer ely wonder ed aloud, “Why would people lik e me?
Even I don’t ﬁnd myself lik able.” As you can imagine, this
cold inter nal message r esonated in her head, played acr oss
her body language, and diminished how much war mth she
could emanate.
For Helen, the path to charisma was thr ough self-warmth.
Warmth as we’ve described it so far is dir ected outwar d—
towar d other people, or towar d life in general. But war mth
can also be dir ected inwar d, towar d ourselves. This self -
directed war mth is called self-compassion,  and though it can
sound (and feel) uncomfortable, it can be a life-changing
(and certainly charisma-enhancing) practice.
First, let’s distinguish thr ee key concepts:
Self-conﬁdence  is our belief in our ability to do or to
learn how to do something.
Self-esteem  is how much we appr ove of or value
ourselves. It’s of ten a comparison-based evaluation
(whether measur ed against other people or against our own
internal standar ds for appr oval).
Self-compassion  is how much war mth we can have for
ourselves, especially when we’r e going thr ough a diﬃcult
experience.
It’s quite possible for people to have high self -conﬁdence
but low self-esteem and very low self -compassion. Lik e
Helen, these people may consider themselves fairly
competent, but they don’t necessarily lik e themselves any
more for it, and they can be very har d on themselves when
they don’t succeed.
Recent behavioral science r esear ch indicates that it may
be healthier to focus on self -compassion than on self -

--- PAGE 104 ---
esteem. 6 The for mer is based on self -acceptance, the latter
on self -evaluation and social comparison. Self -esteem is
more of a r oller coaster, contingent on how we believe we
compar e to others. It also tends to cor relate with nar cissism.
Individuals who scor e high on self -compassion scales
demonstrate gr eater emotional r esilience to daily diﬃculties
and fewer negative r eactions to diﬃcult situations, such as
receiving unﬂattering feedback. 7 Higher self -compassion
predicts a gr eater sense of personal r esponsibility for the
outcome of events: it helps pr edict levels of accountability .
People who scor e high on self -compassion also have a lower
tendency for denial. This mak es sense: personal mistak es
would generate less self -criticism, so people would be mor e
willing to admit to them.
When they hear the ter m self-compassion,  people of ten
assume it is synonymous with self -indulgence or self -pity.8
Surprisingly, the opposite is true. Solid behavioral science
resear ch shows that the higher one’s level of self -
compassion, the lower one’s level of self -pity. You can think
of the diﬀer ence between the two this way : self-compassion
is feeling that what happened to you is unfortunate,
wher eas self -pity is feeling that what happened to you is
unfair . In this way, self -pity can lead to r esentment or
bitter ness, and to feeling mor e isolated and alienated. In
contrast, self -compassion of ten leads to incr eased feelings
of connectedness.
Self-compassion is what helps us for give ourselves when
we’ve fallen short; it’s what pr events inter nal criticism fr om
taking over and playing acr oss our face, ruining our
charisma potential. In this way, self -compassion is critical to
emanating war mth.
Interestingly, self -compassion can also help you emanate
greater self -conﬁdence. One of my clients was a high-
perfor ming, high-achieving bank e xecutive who was always
incredibly har d on himself . In our very ﬁrst session, Brian
blurted out: “Y ou know, that inner critic thing, man, it’s a

--- PAGE 105 ---
real pr oblem for me.” He told me he could feel his inter nal
critic nitpicking every imperfection thr oughout his day .
Within minutes of trying the self -compassion technique I
suggested, Brian alr eady felt a diﬀer ence. He told me: “I felt
an immediate eﬀect. I e xhaled, felt r elief, my chest
expanded. I immediately had mor e presence, I felt myself
being mor e of an ‘alpha male’ taking up mor e space!”
Because self -compassion dispels the inner critical voice that
aﬀects body language, it can actually give you a mor e
expansive, conﬁdent postur e. For Brian, parado xically, self -
compassion was the r oute to being per ceived as mor e of a
conﬁdent alpha male.
Self-compassion delivers an impr essive ar ray of beneﬁts:
decreased anxiety, depr ession, and self -criticism; impr oved
relationships and gr eater feelings of social connectedness
and satisfaction with life; incr eased ability to handle
negative events; and even impr oved immune system
functioning. 9
Sounds gr eat, doesn’t it? Unfortunately, self -compassion
isn’t taught in school. In fact, in today’s cultur e it sounds
indulgent and unjustiﬁed, and can feel very alien. Many of
us don’t have a very clear idea of what it is to begin with.
So ﬁrst, let’s get a solid deﬁnition. Kristin Neﬀ, one of
compassion’s for emost r esear chers, deﬁnes self -compassion
as a thr ee-step pr ocess: F irst, r ealizing that we’r e
experiencing diﬃculties. Second, r esponding with kindness
and understanding towar d ourselves when we ar e suﬀering
or feel inadequate, rather than being harshly self -critical.
Third, realizing that whatever we’r e going thr ough is
commonly e xperienced by all human beings, and
remembering that everyone goes thr ough diﬃcult times.
When things go wr ong in our lives, it’s easy to feel that
other people ar e having an easier time. R ecognizing instead
that everyone at some point has had or will have the very
experience you’r e having now can help you feel lik e part

--- PAGE 106 ---
of the lar ger human e xperience rather than feeling isolated
and alienated.
When our inner critic starts pointing out our misdeeds and
imperfections, it will of ten mak e us feel that everyone else
is doing better, that we’r e the only ones who ar e this ﬂawed.
Self-criticism is much str onger when our suﬀering seems
due to our own per ceived failur es and inadequacies than
when it seems due to e xternal cir cumstances. This is when
self-compassion is the most pr ecious.
How does one go about cultivating self -compassion? The
good news is that intention is the most crucial component of
treating yourself kindly . Christopher Ger mer, author of The
Mindful P ath to Self -Compassion,  is adamant that “self -
compassion is not a gif t you’r e either bor n with or not. It’s a
skill, a trainable mental skill that each and every one of us,
without e xception, can develop and str engthen.” Ger mer
suggests starting wher e you ar e right now : discovering the
ways in which you alr eady car e for yourself, and then
reminding yourself to do these things when negativity hits.
Putting It into Practice: Self -Compassion
You can do this simple e xercise in minutes. Just list ﬁve
ways that you alr eady car e for yourself when you’r e
having a har d time.
Star the ones you’ve found particularly eﬀective, and
that’s it. Y ou’ve started your self -compassion list.

--- PAGE 107 ---
You’re now r eady for the mor e intense self -compassion
practices.
The highly charismatic Dalai Lama is known for being such
a radiant pr esence of war mth and caring that even the most
cold-hearted characters melt in his pr esence. He ascribes
much of his eﬀect on people to Buddhist compassion
practices, one of which you’r e about to lear n, called Metta .
Metta is a millennia- old Buddhist compassion and self -
compassion practice that r oughly translates as “loving
kindness.” Simply put, Metta is the conscious practice of
developing kind intentions towar d all beings. When the
brains of dedicated Metta practitioners wer e examined and
tested by neur oscientists, signiﬁcant diﬀer ences came to
light. Not only did they emit deeper brain waves, they also
bounced back fr om str ess scenarios much faster, and they
showed particular enhancement in the lef t frontal lobe of
their corte xes, the “happy r egion ” of the brain. 10
Metta is the single most powerful tool you can use to
counter your inner critic’s attacks, and, with its many
beneﬁts, it is wonderful for boosting charisma. This is,
however, a highly uncomfortable practice for many of us.
Frankly, when I started this practice, it was mor e than
uncomfortable—it was downright awkwar d. Even if it feels
this way for you, too, do it anyway .
Putting It into Practice: Metta
The visualization below will guide you thr ough a custom-
tailor ed for m of Metta, step by step. It has been craf ted
to tak e advantage of two instinctive human tendencies:
our absorption of images and our r espect for authority . If
you’d pr efer to hear me guide you thr ough this e xercise,
you’ll ﬁnd a r ecording online at
http://CharismaMyth.com/metta . Throughout this

--- PAGE 108 ---
exercise, you may notice a certain r hythm cr eated by
the repetitions. That is indeed their purpose; just be
willing to give it a try .
♦ Sit comfortably, close your eyes, and tak e two or
three deep br eaths. As you inhale, imagine drawing in
masses of clean air towar d the top of your head; then
let it whoosh thr ough you fr om head to toe as you
exhale, washing all concer ns away .
♦ Think of any occasion in your life when you
perfor med a good deed, however gr eat or small. Just
one good action—one moment of truth, gener osity, or
courage. F ocus on that memory for a moment.
♦ Now think of one being, whether pr esent or past,
mythical or actual—Jesus, Buddha, Mother T eresa, the
Dalai Lama—who could have gr eat aﬀection for you.
This could be a person, a pet, or even a stuﬀed
animal.
♦ Picture this being in your mind. Imagine their war mth,
their kindness and compassion. See it in their eyes
and face. F eel their war mth radiating towar d you,
enveloping you.
♦ See yourself thr ough their eyes with war mth,
kindness, and compassion. F eel them giving you
complete for giveness for everything your inner critic
says is wr ong. Y ou ar e completely and absolutely
forgiven. Y ou have a clean slate.
♦ Feel them giving you wholehearted acceptance. Y ou
are accepted as you ar e, right now, at this stage of
growth, imperfections and all.

--- PAGE 109 ---
You ar e perfect. A t this stage of development,
you ar e perfect.
At this stage of gr owth, you ar e perfect.
At this stage of perfection, you ar e perfect.
With everything that’s in your head and heart,
you ar e perfect.
♦ With all your imperfections, you ar e perfect.
♦ For this phase of gr owth, you ar e perfect.
♦ You ar e fully appr oved just the way you ar e, at this
stage of development, right now .
After going thr ough the Metta e xercise, my clients of ten
report a physical sense of r elief, their shoulders sagging
during the for giveness visualization, and then war mth rising
during the self -appr oval pr ocess. Many people feel war mth
in their solar ple xus r egion. Some describe a kind of
“exquisite ache,” or feeling “ very tender .” No matter what
you e xperience, if you ar e feeling anything, it means it’s
working.
Even when the e xperience itself doesn’t “ feel” lik e it’s
working, Metta is worth doing because of the spillover eﬀect
it produces. Of ten, though the e xercise itself feels awkwar d,
you will notice throughout the r est of the day that you ar e
more present, connecting better with others and better able
to absorb and enjoy the good moments in your life. As
Germer puts it: “ A moment of self -compassion can change
your entir e day . A string of such moments can change the
course of your life.”
You can use Metta visualization anytime you e xperience
an attack of the inter nal critic. As Ger mer suggests, you can

--- PAGE 110 ---
think of self -compassion as standing up to self -harm, the
same way you’d stand up to something thr eatening a loved
one.
Resear chers who started e xperimenting with these kinds
of visualizations with highly self -critical people r eported
“signiﬁcant r eductions in depr ession, anxiety, self -criticism,
shame, and inferiority” while noting a “signiﬁcant incr ease
in feelings of war mth and r eassurance for the self .”11
If the Metta visualization didn’t work for you, try putting
up, thr oughout your home or oﬃce, photographs of people
for whom you feel aﬀection. These pictur es could be of
friends or family members, or even public ﬁgur es who you
feel could  have aﬀection for you, such as the Dalai Lama,
Nelson Mandela, or whichever ﬁgur es resonate with your
personal beliefs or bring war mth to your heart (pets and
stuﬀed animals included).
To nurtur e my inter nal war mth I set up a “Metta cir cle” of
photographs in the ar ea wher e I practice every mor ning. I
also car ry a small book of favorite wisdoms with me when I
want to ensur e that I’ll be in the right charismatic mental
state. The heart-sof tening and rising war mth I feel every
time I glance thr ough it is invaluable. It boosts my charisma
within minutes, moving me fr om a state of wor ry or ir ritation
to one of calm, conﬁdence, and war mth.
One of my clients put together what she calls a “lovable
book.” Anytime anyone says something kind,
complimentary, or aﬀectionate to her, she jots it down in
this book. She’s even gone thr ough her past jour nals and
gleaned pearls of war mth. Every time she r eads it, she says,
it mak es her feel war m, secur e, and cherished. She feels
that she has a “cheerleading squad” in the back of her
mind, supporting her thr oughout the day .
Using Y our Body to Aﬀect Y our Mind

--- PAGE 111 ---
So far, we’ve focused mainly on the ways that our mind
aﬀects our body—the many ways in which our mental and
emotional states aﬀect our postur e, body language, and
facial e xpressions. But did you know the pr ocess also works
in reverse? Emotions and body language ar e so link ed that
adopting a certain postur e or facial e xpression will, in fact,
create the cor responding feelings in your mind. Just as with
visualization, wher e the right image will cr eate
corresponding emotions and body language, you can
reverse-engineer many emotions by adopting the
corresponding body language.
Harvar d and Columbia psychology r esear chers found that
subjects who assumed a str ong, conﬁdent physical postur e
and then spok e with a str ong voice and imposing hand
gestur es actually pr oduced a biochemical r eaction that
made them feel and seem mor e conﬁdent and powerful. In
contrast, those who adopted a hesitant, submissive
demeanor e xperienced the e xact opposite biochemical
reaction. 12
Displaying conﬁdent body language will actually mak e you
feel more conﬁdent; these feelings will in tur n aﬀect your
body language, which will adapt accor dingly, displaying yet
more conﬁdent signals. This will give you yet another feeling
boost, and the cycle will build upon itself . All you have to do
is get it going.
Putting It into Practice:  
Using Y our Body to Change Y our Mind
Try out the following postur es to see for yourself just
how powerfully the ar rangement of your body can aﬀect
your mind and your feelings.
♦ First, adopt the body language of someone who’s
utterly depr essed. L et your shoulders slump, your

--- PAGE 112 ---
head hang, your face sag. Now, without moving a
muscle,  try to feel r eally, truly e xcited. Go ahead, try
to see if you can cr eate any e xcitement without
moving. It’s nearly impossible.
♦ Now do the opposite. Physically spring into
excitement. Jump up and down as if you’ve won the
lottery, smile the biggest smile you can, wave your
arms in the air, and while doing all this, try to feel
depressed. Again, it’s nearly impossible.
Here are a few mor e physiological changes to play with:
♦ For conﬁdence, assertiveness, and to be able to
emanate gravitas, imagine playing the r ole of a
military general—tak e a wide stance, puﬀ up your
chest, br oaden your shoulders, stand straight, and
conﬁdently put your ar ms behind your back. F eel the
eﬀect of this postur e inter nally.
♦ For a boost in both ener gy and war mth, stand up,
stretch your hands as high up as possible, inhale as
much as you can—imagine your rib cage e xpanding,
doubling in size—mak e the biggest smile you can and
look upwar d, hold for a second, and then r elax
everything.
You can use these quick tools in pr etty much any
situation—anytime you’d lik e an inter nal-state change,
whether just befor e an important business meeting or a
social gathering.
When I e xplained this technique to one of my close
friends, she e xclaimed: “I know e xactly what you mean! In
Madrid, I had an e xperience that has inﬂuenced me ever
since. I call it my Miss P iggy Moment.” When The Muppet

--- PAGE 113 ---
Show ’s Miss P iggy is about to go on stage in fr ont of an
audience, she pauses for a second, looks in the mir ror,
preens, and then announces, “I feel beeyootiful!” And then,
shoulders back, head held high, she swoops out to mak e her
grand entrance. This is how my friend told me her own
story :
I was walking up the Gran V ia in Madrid, feeling
tired, hungry, lonely, unfashionably dr essed, and the
epitome of an ugly American. The attitude was
deﬁnitely not working for me, so what to do? I
decided that I was a movie star incognito . I stood up
straighter, shoulders back, head er ect, with the
postur e that I imagine I would have if I wer e royalty .
Suddenly the dr ess that had seemed so out of place
a moment ago felt lik e an amazing fashion
statement, something that everyone else should
copy. I noticed as I walk ed down the str eet that
heads wer e turning, all of them. When I ask ed a
man for dir ections, he said he would be honor ed if I
would allow him to show me the way . It was
amazing. F rom one second to the ne xt, I went fr om
a dowdy, frumpy, ugly stranger to a head-tur ning
movie star . It was memorable. And enlightening.
When I tell them they can be per ceived as powerful simply
by pr ojecting a mor e conﬁdent body language, my clients
are sometimes concer ned that conﬁdence is something
you’r e either bor n with or acquir e during early childhood
experiences. They believe that just changing their body
language would be faking it.
In fact, you r eally can gain actual self -conﬁdence as well
as the instant per ception of gr eater self -conﬁdence just by
changing your body language. Y es, it might feel unfamiliar
or awkwar d at ﬁrst, a bit lik e riding a bik e without training
wheels. But if you use the techniques, it will work. And if you

--- PAGE 114 ---
keep at it, you will get comfortable with it. Eventually, it will
become second natur e.
Warming Up for K ey Moments
Imagine that you’ve been training to run a marathon. Y ou’ve
completed several other races, you’r e in top for m, you’r e
ready. On the day of the marathon, what would you do as
you ar rived? W ould you just stand ar ound until the starting
gun and then tear oﬀ at top speed? Of course not. Y ou’d
probably tak e car e to war m up car efully .
You can do the e xact same thing with charisma. Plan a
warm-up period that allows you to gradually ramp up to the
level you want. When you want to ensur e peak charismatic
perfor mance, don’t expect yourself to be on top of your
game, going fr om zer o to full charisma instantly and at will.
You can’t r ely on pur e willpower to get you ther e. In fact, it’s
important to understand just how limited our daily r eserves
of willpower r eally ar e.13
Behavioral science r esear chers have come to the
conclusion that willpower is a bit lik e a muscle that fatigues
depending on how much we use it. If we draw on our
willpower to r esist a temptation or to put up with a certain
annoyance, it will be weak er when we need it for another
activity soon af ter. In fact, e xerting willpower physically
fatigues us. 14 It is a ﬁnite r esour ce, so be strategic about
wher e and when you e xpend it.
Remember R obert, the quick-thinking, impatient
executive? He told me that he would of ten be annoyed at
himself for his inability to be patient with people. He noticed
that when he spent time during a meeting or a conversation
ﬁghting his inter nal rising impatience, he’d perfor m less well
for hours af terwar d. When several such interactions
happened in the mor ning, his ability to be charismatic later
in the day clearly suﬀer ed.

--- PAGE 115 ---
I explained to R obert that every time he used his
willpower, he depleted his willpower r eserves. He could stop
berating himself and instead r ealize that it was simply a
matter of allocating his willpower r esour ces appr opriately . I
asked him to car efully consider which of these daily
interactions wer e worth spending his pr ecious willpower
capital on. F or the interactions that wer e not worth it, I
recommended that R obert either delegate them to a junior
employee or ask a colleague to handle them in e xchange for
taking on a task that would be less willpower -depleting for
him.
Here’s how this could all play out for you in practice. L et’s
say you’r e attending a dinner that could signiﬁcantly aﬀect
your car eer, so you’d lik e to be particularly charismatic. T o
optimize your chances of being most charismatic, you know
you need to get into a mental state of war mth and power . If,
at dinner, you want to br oadcast absolute self -conﬁdence,
make sur e that the day of and especially the hours leading
up to the dinner do not include meetings or interactions that
could mak e you feel bad about yourself . Rather than just
showing up at dinner, plan a war m-up that will boost your
self-esteem: have coﬀee with someone who mak es you feel
good about yourself, or plan an activity (play a sport or a
musical instrument) that mak es you feel competent or
accomplished. If ther e is a cocktail r eception befor e the
dinner, interact with people who mak e you feel good about
yourself, not those who criticize or tease you, even in jest.
Yes, making fun of one another can be highly enjoyable—but
save that for evenings when charisma is less critical.
Just lik e an athlete who is car eful to stay center ed on the
morning of a big race, when you need to be at your most
charismatic, be highly vigilant about what’s entering your
mind. Even the music you listen to can aﬀect your
emotional and mental state. Y ou know how listening to sad
songs can mak e you feel sad? Be awar e that everything  that
enters your mind aﬀects your inter nal state.

--- PAGE 116 ---
I curate my playlists considering both tempo and lyrics,
and when pr eparing for a k ey moment, I’m car eful to choose
songs that cor respond with the mood I’m trying to achieve. I
have playlists for self -conﬁdence, war mth, empathy, and
patience. I’ve found that it r eally mak es a diﬀer ence. These
playlists ar e also or ganized as “pr e-speech,” “mor ning
wake-up,” and even “pr e–family gatherings” (yes, I’m
serious).
One of my clients wr ote me e xcitedly af ter ﬁrst using the
warming-up technique. He said: “I just tried it, and it
work ed! I’m usually uncomfortable in lar ge gr oups and think
about how unpleasant the e xperience will be. Befor e this
gathering, I scheduled dinner with a longtime friend and
went on a walk. I felt gr eat when I enter ed and saw a friend I
hadn’t seen in a while so I pulled him aside for a quick
catching up, which I knew would also mak e me feel gr eat.
From then on the occasion was a br eeze. Several people
even commented on how r elaxed I look ed, giving the
impression that I was deﬁnitely enjoying myself . And I was!”
Another one of my clients who r egularly hosts parties told
me that he of ten plays his planned party -music playlist as
he’s getting his apartment r eady. “This helps get my ener gy
level up and gets me in the mood so I’m r eady to play host.
I sometimes do it befor e interviews, too .”
The ne xt time you have a k ey meeting, follow the e xercise
in the box below to plan the ramp-up. When you need to be
particularly charismatic, the following tool can be a gr eat
reinfor cer.
Putting It into Practice: W arming Up
When war ming up for an important event, follow this
checklist to pr epare your inter nal state and maximize
your charisma.

--- PAGE 117 ---
♦ Go over your schedule for the hours leading up to the
event. Think about how the activities and meetings
you have planned will aﬀect you.
♦ If you can, avoid any diﬃcult encounters and aim for
conﬁdence- or war mth-boosting e xperiences instead.
♦ Create your own music playlist for the inter nal state
you’d lik e to have. Y ou could mak e one for ener gy and
conﬁdence, one that mak es you feel war m and
empathetic, and another that mak es you feel calm
and ser ene. This e xercise is a lot of fun in itself, and
you can add new songs as of ten as you’d lik e.
This is also a gr eat substitute for the pr evious chapter’s
visualization e xercises for anyone who doesn’t yet feel
comfortable with them. It can be used in place of
visualizations, or you can plan a war m-up in addition to
visualization if you r eally want to maximize your charisma
power .
Let’s say that you’r e about to discuss a diﬃcult issue with
someone who intimidates you. T o war m up for the meeting,
practice ﬁrst in your mind, visualizing the scene as you
would lik e it to unfold. Then ask someone with whom you
feel comfortable to r ole-play the situation with you. Mak e
sure you adopt a str ong, conﬁdent postur e. Imagine yourself
as a four -star ar my general r eviewing his tr oops. T ake a wide
stance, puﬀ up your chest, br oaden your shoulders, stand
straight, and conﬁdently put your ar ms behind your back.
Practice making your ar guments with a str ong voice and
imposing hand gestur es.
When you have a series of meetings, calls, or interviews,
whether in one day or over the period of a week, it’s well
worth scheduling them fr om least to most important, so that
you can practice, lear n, and gradually incr ease in skill and

--- PAGE 118 ---
conﬁdence as you go along. Think of yourself as an athlete
going for test matches or trial races.
You can also try this with letters or e-mails if you have
several to write on the same topic. W rite the least important
e-mails ﬁrst and ﬁnish with the most important ones. By the
time you’ve written four or ﬁve e-mails, your mind will be
more practiced, your writing mor e ﬂuid.
Now that you’ve lear ned how to access the right mental
state for charisma, how can you ensur e that these positive
changes ar e her e to stay? This is wher e charisma
maintenance comes in. If you r eached a new standar d of
physical ﬁtness and wanted to maintain it, you’d k eep up
your ﬁtness r egime and adopt a healthy diet. Y ou wouldn’t
expect to stay in shape without r egularly going to the gym
and eating right. Charisma operates on the same principle:
stay charismatic by r egularly using all the tools you’ve
learned in the pr evious chapters.
KEY T AKEA WAYS
 Creating an optimal mental state is crucial to unleashing
your full charisma potential.
 Visualization can help you cr eate the right mental state
and thus the right charismatic body language. T o mak e
visualizations most eﬀective, vividly engage all ﬁve
senses in your imagination.
 You can incr ease both war mth and conﬁdence by
practicing gratitude, goodwill, and compassion for others
as well as for yourself .
 Just as pr ofessional athletes and perfor mers do, plan a
gradual war m-up to r each your peak charismatic
perfor mance. Befor e important events, avoid e xperiences
that would impair your mental state and plan war mth- and
conﬁdence-boosting activities instead.

--- PAGE 119 ---
 Your body aﬀects your mind. Flip the visualization
technique on its head and practice adopting the right
postur e and facial e xpressions to access mor e of almost
any desir ed inter nal state.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 120 ---
6
Diﬀerent Charisma Styles
JUST AS THERE  are diﬀer ent leadership and personality styles,
there are also diﬀer ent charisma styles. Both Madonna and
His Holiness the Dalai Lama draw cr owds and ar e seen as
charismatic, but for diﬀer ent reasons.
Throughout this chapter we’ll look at four distinct kinds of
charisma: focus, visionary, kindness, and authority . We’ll see
how each of these is per ceived, how to develop it, and when
to use it.
There are, of course, other kinds of charisma we could
consider, but these four ar e the most practical for daily life,
the easiest to access, and thus the most useful to study .
Focus Charisma: Presence and Conﬁdence
Elon Musk, cofounder of P ayPal and cur rent CEO of T esla
Motors, embodies focus charisma. As he’ll tell you himself,
Musk is very much an intr overt. In T esla’s open oﬃce space,
his nearly empty desk is in the far right cor ner, two huge
monitors ar ranged to cr eate a cocoon, shielding him fr om
the rest of the oﬃce.
However, when he emer ges fr om behind the scr eens, he is
fully pr esent and fully focused. Y ou can feel the intensity of
his attention, how k eenly he listens to and absorbs
everything you say . And he doesn’t need to say a wor d to
show you that he understands you: his nonverbal body
language mak es you feel completely listened to and

--- PAGE 121 ---
understood. (Y ou’ll lear n the secr ets to this kind of listening
in chapter 8 .)
Focus charisma is primarily based on a per ception of
presence. It gives people the feeling that you ar e fully
present with them, listening to them and absorbing what
they say . Focus charisma mak es people feel hear d, listened
to, and understood. Don’t under estimate this kind of
charisma; it can be surprisingly powerful.
Focus charisma can be highly eﬀective in business. One
executive who has work ed closely with Bill Gates told me:
Most people think of charisma as people who ar e
larger than life, who command a r oom with an over -
the-top personality . But despite his unassuming
appearance, being slight in build and looking lik e
the ster eotypical geek, Bill does command the
room; his pr esence is immediately felt. If your
deﬁnition of charisma is that when you walk into a
room all eyes ar e on you, then Bill has it. If it’s that
quality that draws people towar d you and mak es
them want to listen to what you have to say, then
Bill has that, too .
Jack K eeler, for mer pr esident of IBM, was known as a very
charismatic ﬁgur e who embodied another k ey component of
focus charisma: the ability to communicate r espect.
Remember that one of the foundations of charisma is
making other people feel good about themselves. K eeler
knew how to mak e others feel that their opinions matter ed,
and that they wer e important. He truly believed that even
the most junior staﬀ could have pearls of wisdom to impart.
One e xecutive who work ed with him told me: “Y ou’d see him
go to plant manufactur ers and engineers, and you could see
that he held them in such high r egard; he r evered them.
And in tur n, they r evered him—they’d light up when he’d
walk into the r oom.”

--- PAGE 122 ---
What people notice:  We assess focus charisma entir ely
through demeanor . Presence is k ey: because we can
perceive any distracted, inattentive body language, such
signals would quickly under mine focus charisma.
Developing F ocus Charisma
Focus charisma r equir es, of course, the ability to focus and
be truly pr esent. Good listening skills ar e nonnegotiable, as
is a certain degr ee of patience. T o develop focus charisma,
cultivate your ability to be pr esent: mak e use of the
techniques fr om the “ Presence” section in chapter 2  (get
into your toes!). Y ou’ll also need the skills to handle
charisma-impairing inter nal discomfort, so tools such as the
responsibility transfer and delving into sensations ar e worth
acquiring.
Once you have it:  Focus charisma is per haps the easiest
form of charisma to access, and can be surprisingly
eﬀective, but it comes with two main risks. The ﬁrst is that if
you display too little power you could come acr oss as too
eager, and consequently low-status or even subservient.
You’ll lear n in chapter 9  how to incr ease the amount of
conﬁdence you br oadcast. A less common risk is e xhibiting
too little war mth, which leads to attention that is too
intense. If you become laser -focused, your interaction may
start to feel lik e an interview, or, worse yet, an
interrogation. This is wher e you need to balance focus with
warmth and acceptance or genuine r espect, and the
following two chapters will show you just how to do that.
Though it is primarily based on pr esence, focus charisma
still r equir es a modicum of both conﬁdence and war mth. Y ou
can’t discar d either dimension entir ely.
When to use it:  Focus charisma is appr opriate for almost
all business situations. It’s particularly useful when you
need people to open up and shar e infor mation. In fact, this

--- PAGE 123 ---
is a gr eat charisma style for management consultants or
those in other pr ofessional services, such as lawyers,
accountants, and ﬁnancial advisers. F ocus charisma can
also be very helpful in diﬃcult situations, such as
negotiations or to defuse hostile conversations. On the other
hand, avoid focus charisma when you need to appear
authoritative or during emer gencies when you need
immediate compliance.
Visionary Charisma: Belief and Conﬁdence
Visionary charisma mak es others feel inspir ed; it mak es us
believe . It can be r emark ably eﬀective even though it won’t
necessarily mak e people lik e you. Steve Jobs was
notoriously fear ed inside Apple and had many detractors
both within and without, but even these detractors r eadily
admitted to his being both visionary and charismatic. One
recent attendee to a Steve Jobs pr esentation told me: “ He
spoke with such conviction, such passion, he had all of our
neurons scr eaming, Yes! I get it! I’m with you!!! ”
Why is visionary charisma so eﬀective and powerful?
Because of our natural discomfort with uncertainty . In a
constantly changing world, we crave something solid to
cling to . During Geor ge W . Bush’s ﬁrst pr esidential
campaign, polls of his supporters r evealed that a k ey to
their attraction to him was “his conviction and certitude in
his beliefs.”
Conveying visionary charisma r equir es the ability to
project complete conviction and conﬁdence in a cause. In
this way, visionary charisma is based on power . However, it
is also based on war mth. V isionary charismatics ar en’t
necessarily war m people, but they do feel str ongly, even
passionately, about their vision. And to be truly charismatic,
their vision must include a certain amount of nobility and
altruism.

--- PAGE 124 ---
One r eporter described Steve Jobs as being “driven by a
nearly messianic zeal.… Jobs doesn’t sell computers. He
sells the pr omise of a better world.” V isionary charismatics
often pr omise r edemption—think Joan of Ar c or Martin
Luther King Jr . With visionary charisma, you’r e selling people
on the vision mor e than on yourself .
What people notice:  We assess visionary charisma
primarily thr ough demeanor, which includes body language
and behavior . Due to the fact that people tend to accept
whatever you pr oject, if you seem inspir ed, they will assume
you have something to be inspir ed about. F or visionary
charisma, appearance matters far less than it does for other
charisma styles. Y ou could be wearing rags and still
successfully convey visionary charisma.
Developing V isionary Charisma
The message matters for visionary charisma. This means
knowing how to craf t a bold vision and knowing how to
deliver the message charismatically (see chapter 11 ).
One of the k eys to communicating your visionary
charisma is getting yourself into a state of complete
conviction, shedding any doubt. Y ou can use the tools you
gained in chapters 3 and 4, such as r ewriting r eality, to
strengthen your belief, or the r esponsibility transfer, to fr ee
yourself fr om the eﬀect of uncertainty .
Once you have it:  Visionary charisma can inspir e fervent
belief and lead monumental change. However, it can also
inspir e fanatical belief and lead people to disastr ous
decisions (cult leader Jim Jones persuaded nine hundr ed
people to commit mass suicide).
When to use it:  Visionary charisma is important at times
when you need to inspir e people. It’s particularly helpful
when you want to inspir e creativity .

--- PAGE 125 ---
Kindness Charisma: W armth and Conﬁdence
When you’r e a baby, no matter what you do your par ents
will think you’r e perfect just as you ar e. But af ter a few
months, their acceptance becomes conditional. Y ou now
have to eat your car rots and smile at Grandma to ear n
approval. Seldom will you feel again such complete
unconditional acceptance fr om anyone, with the e xception,
perhaps, of the ﬁrst few stages of falling in love.
One of the r easons that the Dalai Lama has such a
powerful eﬀect on people is his ability to radiate both
tremendous war mth and complete acceptance. P eople who
may have never felt completely, wholeheartedly accepted
suddenly feel truly seen and enveloped in acceptance. This
is kindness charisma in action.
Kindness charisma is primarily based on war mth. It
connects with people’s hearts, and mak es them feel
welcomed, cherished, embraced, and, most of all,
completely accepted.
What people notice:  Like visionary and focus charisma,
kindness charisma comes entir ely fr om body language—
speciﬁcally your face, and even mor e speciﬁcally your eyes.
Developing Kindness Charisma
You, too, can lear n how to emanate some of the Dalai Lama
magic, though it does r equir e willingness, patience,
practice, and the right tools. Start with the mindset: practice
accessing war mth with inter nal tools such as gratitude,
goodwill, compassion, and self -compassion fr om chapter 5 .
You’ll lear n in chapter 9  how to emanate war mth fr om your
face, body language, and demeanor and how to mak e the
right kind of eye contact.
Because kindness charisma is heavily dependent on
warmth, it is vital to avoid any body language of tension,
criticism, or coldness. The inter nal tools for dealing with

--- PAGE 126 ---
mental or physical discomfort fr om chapter 4  can be
invaluable her e.
Once you have it:  Though kindness charisma is based
primarily on war mth, without power you risk coming oﬀ as
overeager to please. This is wher e the ability to convey a
modicum of power becomes important.
The tools you gained in chapter 5 —visualization, war ming
up, and using your body to change your mind—will help you
get the right mindset. The following chapters will help you
balance war mth and power in your body language.
Kindness charisma has its costs. One of my dear friends
radiates such kindness charisma that people become
enraptur ed wher ever she goes. F rom colleagues at the oﬃce
to cashiers at the super mark et, people feel accepted and
cared for as soon as they’r e in her pr esence. This can be
lovely, but it can also be a heavy bur den for her to car ry.
She suﬀers pain and guilt when these people, having
become enchanted, feel hurt or r esentful when she can’t
make room for them in her life. This is one of the downsides
of kindness charisma: it can lead to adulation and,
potentially, overattachment. Y ou will gain tools to pr event
these side eﬀects in chapter 13 , on living a charismatic life.
When to use it:  Kindness charisma is perfect anytime
you want to cr eate an emotional bond or mak e people feel
safe and comfortable. It can be critical in some situations,
such as when you have to deliver bad news (see chapter
12). It can also be a surprisingly eﬀective tool when dealing
with diﬃcult people (and chapter 12  will cover that, too).
However, just as with focus charisma, you may want to
avoid it when you need to appear authoritative or when
there’s a risk that people might get too comfortable and
share too much (thankfully, you have chapter 13  to help you
avoid this).
Authority Charisma: Status and Conﬁdence

--- PAGE 127 ---
This for m of charisma is possibly the most powerful one of
all. Our instinctive defer ence to authority can tak e epic
proportions, and, of course, can be equally tur ned towar d
good or evil. Colin P owell and the Dalai Lama embody
authority charisma, but so did Stalin and Mussolini. The
human r eaction to authority runs deep; it’s har dwired into
our brains. 1
Those who possess authority charisma ar e not necessarily
likable. Michael Jor dan, at the height of his car eer with the
Chicago Bulls, told a jour nalist that he car ed much mor e
about being a leader than about being lik ed. The r eporter
wrote: “ He rankles, sometimes infuriates, his teammates.
But he uses his charisma to lif t the whole team’s level of
play.”
What people notice:  Authority charisma is primarily
based on a per ception of power : the belief that this person
has the power to aﬀect our world. W e evaluate someone’s
authority charisma thr ough four indicators: body language,
appearance, title, and the r eactions of others.
We appraise body language ﬁrst and for emost. Does it
emanate conﬁdence in the person’s power to inﬂuence
others, or to aﬀect the world ar ound them?
Second, we assess appearance. W e are biologically
programmed to car e about status and to be impr essed by it
because this instinctive reaction favors our survival: high-
status individuals have the power to help or hurt us. T o
survive, we need to know wher e in the pecking or der we
stand. As a consequence, we’r e exquisitely ﬁne-tuned to
any clues that can help us deter mine other people’s status.
Clothing is one of our ﬁrst and str ongest clues in
evaluating status, thus potential power, and thus authority
charisma. W e look for signs of e xpertise (doctors’ white
coats) or high authority (military or police unifor ms). W e pay
particular attention to signs of high social status or success,
such as e xpensive clothing. In one e xperiment conducted in
New Y ork City, people tended to follow a jaywalk er dressed

--- PAGE 128 ---
in an e xpensive suit sooner than one dr essed in mor e casual
clothing. 2
In another e xperiment, a r esear cher conducted fak e
surveys in shopping malls wearing either a designer -logo
sweater or a no -logo sweater . When faced with the designer
label, 52 per cent of people agr eed to tak e the survey,
compar ed with only 13 per cent who saw no logo . Expensive
logos also aﬀected people’s charitable impulses. R esear ch
assistants br ought in nearly twice as many donations when
their shirts bor e a visible designer label than they did when
they wor e (otherwise identical) no -label shirts. 3
Finally, a person’s title and the way others r eact to them
give us mor e clues about their authority charisma, though
these last two factors car ry less weight than the pr evious
two. Instinctively, we understand that someone who has a
high title but gar ners little r espect has less r eal power than
someone of lower title who is gr eatly r espected.
Though all these assessments can happen in less than a
second, the or der is nonetheless important. If ther e is a
conﬂict between signals, we’ll trust the signals in the or der
you’ve just seen. As always, body language trumps all other
signs of charisma. Even if all the other signals ar e present, a
body language of insecurity will under mine any possibility of
authority charisma. Conversely, you can gain a certain
measur e of authority charisma thr ough body language alone
if it’s str ong enough.
Developing Authority Charisma
Your main aim if you want to gain authority charisma is to
project power by displaying signs of status and conﬁdence.
Luckily, the two most important dimensions of status and
conﬁdence ar e also the ones over which you have the most
inﬂuence: body language and appearance.

--- PAGE 129 ---
Because it is aﬀected so str ongly by body language, your
authority charisma depends on how conﬁdent you feel in
that moment. This is wher e the tools you gained in chapter
5 come in: you can use visualizations, war m-ups, or your
body to change your mind to get into a conﬁdent mental
state.
To project power and conﬁdence in your body language,
you’ll need to lear n how to “tak e up space” with your
postur e, reduce nonverbal r eassurances (such as e xcessive
nodding), and avoid ﬁdgeting. Y ou may need to speak less,
to speak mor e slowly, to know how and when to pause your
sentences, or how to modulate your intonation. W e’ll cover
all the speciﬁcs of emanating power thr ough your body
language in chapter 9 .
As far as appearance goes, choosing clothing that appears
expensive or high-status is one of the easiest ways to look
authoritative.
Once you have it:  Authority charisma has the advantage
that you get listened to and of ten obeyed. It does, however,
have several disadvantages:
It can inhibit critical thinking in others.
It doesn’t invite feedback, so you risk not r eceiving
information you actually need.
It can easily mak e you appear ar rogant.
This is wher e lear ning to emanate war mth can be your
saving grace. Not only will your war mth r educe the risk of
your being per ceived as ar rogant or intimidating, it will also
be mor e highly valued because you’r e now seen as high-
status. If a low-status person is eager to please us, we may
ﬁnd this pleasant, but we don’t necessarily value their
eager ness very highly . After all, they can’t do much for us;
it’s rather we who can do things for them. On the other
hand, if a high-status alpha grants us attention and war mth,
we’re thrilled, because they can move mountains.

--- PAGE 130 ---
When to use it:  Authority charisma works well in many
business situations, and in any situation wher e you want
people to listen and obey . It’s particularly useful during a
crisis (see chapter 12 ), and whenever you need immediate
compliance fr om people. On the other hand, you might want
to avoid it in social settings such as weddings or funerals or
in sensitive business situations such as delivering bad news.
Avoid it also when you want to encourage cr eativity or
constructive feedback, as it can inhibit critical thinking in
others. In these cases, use visionary, focus, or war mth
charisma instead.
Choosing the Right Charisma
There isn’t just one way to be charismatic, nor does one
charisma style work in every situation. When ar e certain
styles mor e eﬀective? Which style will suit you best?
Deter mining your pr eferred charisma style and knowing
when to use it is a crucial step towar d fulﬁlling your
charisma potential.
Diﬀer ent kinds of charisma will be appr opriate in diﬀer ent
circumstances. And diﬀer ent kinds of charisma will be a
better or poor er ﬁt for you. T o decide which elements of
charisma to bring out you’ll need to assess thr ee indicators:
what’s best suited to your personality, your goals, and the
situation.
Your personality:  It’s important to know what feels
right for you, and to choose the styles, tools, and
techniques that match your signatur e strengths.
Your goals:  You also need to be clear on what you want
to achieve. Some modes of charisma will mak e people
obey you, others will lead them to open up and shar e.
The situation:  What conte xt are you stepping into?
The situation sets the stage upon which your charisma
will play out.

--- PAGE 131 ---
The Right Charisma for Y ou
The ﬁrst consideration is your fundamental character .
One of John K erry’s mistak es during the 2004 pr esidential
campaign was trying to “dumb down ” his focused,
intellectual charisma to become mor e “accessible.” Not only
was this ineﬀective, it also backﬁr ed by alienating those
who had been drawn to his original personality . His
discomfort made him appear awkwar d and inauthentic.
On the other hand, in the world of business, Steve Jobs
cultivated and stayed true to his kind of visionary charisma
and, despite what may be said of his personality or
leadership style, always came acr oss as authentic as well as
powerful. Oprah W infrey has spok en about her decision to
be authentic as a critical tur ning point in her car eer. Once
she gave up her attempts to be “the ne xt Diane Sawyer,”
she ﬂourished as “the best Oprah she could be.”
You don’t have to for ce yourself into one particular style to
be charismatic, and I ﬁr mly advocate not doing something
that goes against your values: it would only work against
you. T rying to for ce yourself into a charisma style that r eally
isn’t right for you can be as unpleasant as it is
counterpr oductive. F or example, an intr overt for cing himself
to be e xtroverted might feel unnatural and awkwar d, and be
perceived that way by others. Not only would he put himself
through an unpleasant e xperience, he would also fail in his
quest to appear naturally e xtroverted. Instead of ﬁghting it,
knowing how to work with your natural style can r eap major
rewar ds.
Putting It into Practice:  
Working with Introversion
If you’r e naturally uncomfortable in lar ge social
gatherings, the ne xt time you’r e at a party, don’t for ce

--- PAGE 132 ---
yourself to be sociable right away or to be “ on” for the
whole evening. Instead, try these easy tweaks. Give
yourself ﬁve minutes af ter you ar rive to hang back and
observe. Then give yourself little “intr oversion br eaks”
during the party : ﬁve-minute pock ets of solitude. I know
one highly charismatic intr overt who of ten does e xactly
that during both social and business events. When she
reemer ges to mingle, people fr equently comment on
how radiant she is.
Not only do you not have to for ce yourself into one
particular charisma style, you don’t have to limit yourself to
just one style. These styles ar e just e xamples of how the
diﬀer ent elements of charisma play out in the world ar ound
us. In r eality, you can alter nate between several modes of
charisma, fr om one moment to the ne xt. The mor e modes
you master, the mor e versatile you can be.
The ability to adapt to a variety of social situations is
characteristic of highly charismatic people. Hayes Bar nard,
the charismatic CEO of P aramount Equity, told me that he
sees himself as a Swiss Ar my knife, adaptable to any
situation. When he moves thr ough a r oom, he intentionally
varies his voice and body language accor ding to the person
or people he is speaking to . In selecting leaders, he looks for
people who have a similar ability to adapt in multiple ways.
This is r eally just a matter of accessing diﬀer ent aspects
of your personality and getting comfortable e xpressing
them—we all have within us a measur e of kindness or a
modicum of authority . As you practice each style, it will
gradually become mor e natural. P ractice enough, and these
behaviors become as easy and comfortable as brushing
your teeth.
Not only can you ﬂow fr om one mode of charisma into
another, you can also mix and match, adding a dash of
kindness to your authority charisma or infusing some

--- PAGE 133 ---
conﬁdent authority into your focus charisma. Oprah can
demonstrate focus, kindness, and in some cases even
visionary charisma during a single interview .
Presidents Clinton and Obama both embody visionary
charisma. Both have a touch of authority . However, Obama
leads with focus. P eople who meet him say that his
intelligence is palpable, and that he intensely focuses on
whomever he is interacting with. Clinton, on the other hand,
leads with war mth. He’s known for being “ oﬀ-the-charts
empathetic.”
When choosing a charisma style, r emember to check in
with your mental and emotional state. If you’r e feeling
insecur e, don’t try to pull oﬀ authority charisma until you’ve
regained your conﬁdence. Instead, choose a charisma style
that demands less conﬁdence, such as focus or kindness,
and then gradually move to authority if you so desir e. Or
take the time to ramp up your conﬁdence so you will be
ready to br oadcast authority charisma.
The second consideration when choosing a charisma style
is the goal you want to accomplish. How do you want to
make others feel? How do you want them to r eact to you?
For instance, if you want to be listened to and obeyed,
authority charisma is ideal. The pr evious sections gave you
an idea of which charisma style can best support which
goal. As you practice each style you’ll get a feel for which
works best in diﬀer ent situations.
The Right Charisma for Each Situation
The thir d consideration when choosing a charisma style is
the situation you’r e in.
There are scor es of situations in life wher e certain kinds of
charisma, no matter how powerful, ar e not welcome. On the
other hand, certain situations speciﬁcally call for certain
kinds of charisma. F or example, studies consistently show

--- PAGE 134 ---
that in times of crisis, people tur n to individuals who ar e
bold, conﬁdent, and decisive. 4 This is the time to bring out
authority or visionary charisma.
The conte xt in which you operate sets the lens thr ough
which others will per ceive you and your charisma.
First, let’s look at the emotional conte xt. People’s
emotional states inﬂuence their per ception of you, and
either enhance or inhibit the power of your charisma.
Certain emotional states, such as a feeling of crisis or
urgency, incr ease the chance that people will ﬁnd you
charismatic. However, ther e can be charisma without crisis:
President Geor ge W . Bush was consider ed charismatic well
befor e the tur moil of 9/11.
To get a sense for the emotional conte xt around you,
simply ask yourself : How ar e the people ar ound you feeling?
What do they need in this moment? If you’r e ﬁring
someone, authority charisma might not be most ﬁtting—you
may want to bring out focus or kindness charisma instead.
And just lik e Oprah, you can alter nate among several modes
of charisma, playing on diﬀer ent parts of your personality as
you r espond to diﬀer ent aspects of the situation.
Social conte xt matters, too: one behavior could be seen as
charismatic in the United States but not in Japan. The same
amount of eye contact that would be welcomed as an
honest, straightforwar d gaze in most of North America could
be seen as aggr essive and obno xious in parts of Asia.
Though pr esence, war mth, and power ar e the fundamental
elements of charisma, how they get e xpressed varies
somewhat fr om cultur e to cultur e.
However, with all this said, if you get your mental state
and behavior right, you’r e 80 per cent of the way ther e.
Facial e xpressions ar e universal, * so an e xpression of
goodwill, empathy, or concer n would be per ceived in New
York e xactly as it would be in New Delhi or even P apua New
Guinea.

--- PAGE 135 ---
More important, people give gr eat cr edence to the
intentions they per ceive you to have. So if, for instance, you
can get yourself into a mental state of goodwill, this would
show in your facial e xpressions and body language and
register with people on a deep emotional level. P eople
perceiving this would want  to lik e you, want  to see your
behaviors and actions in the most positive way . Think of
goodwill as your charisma safety net: as long as you can get
into a state of goodwill, you will have the absolute best
chances of getting your charisma right (you can r efer back
to chapter 5  for goodwill-boosting techniques).
In addition, you can be strategic in choosing when to try
out new charisma styles: choose low-stak es situations to
expand the boundaries of your comfort zone. If, for instance,
you’r e going to a networking event or a cocktail party that
will have little impact on your car eer or your social life, use
it as a testing gr ound. This is the time to e xperiment and try
out new behaviors. Use these occasions to get pr ogressively
comfortable with new charisma styles. Y ou could even
practice new techniques in short, casual interactions with
cashiers or door men.
On the other hand, when you’r e in a high-stak es situation
—about to give a k ey pr esentation, or going for a job
interview—don’t tak e the risk of coming acr oss as
uncomfortable or inauthentic. In cases lik e these, it’s best to
stick with the behaviors and charisma styles that ar e most
natural to you.

--- PAGE 136 ---


--- PAGE 137 ---
KEY T AKEA WAYS
 Choosing the right charisma style depends on your
personality, goals, and the situation.
 You can alter nate among diﬀer ent charisma styles or even
blend them together . Don’t for ce yourself into a charisma
style that is just too awkwar d for you. Doing so would
negatively aﬀect how you feel and how others per ceive
you.

--- PAGE 138 ---
 The mor e charisma styles you can access, the mor e
versatile and conﬁdent you will be.
 Stretch out of your comfort zone in low-stak es situations.
 Stick with styles you alr eady know well in high-stak es
situations.
 Let goodwill be your safety net. Coming fr om a place of
genuine goodwill gives you the best chance of getting
your charisma right.
* Paul Ekman’s fascinating r esear ch on this topic led him to travel ar ound the
world, going to the most r emote locations and studying tribes of hunter -
gather ers, cataloging and testing mor e than ten thousand facial e xpressions.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 139 ---
7
Charismatic First Impressions
YOU NEVER GET  a second chance to mak e a gr eat ﬁrst
impression. W ithin a few seconds, with just a glance, people
have judged your social and economic level, your level of
education, and even your level of success. W ithin minutes,
they’ve also decided your levels of intelligence,
trustworthiness, competence, friendliness, and conﬁdence.
Although these evaluations happen in an instant, they can
last for years: ﬁrst impr essions ar e often indelible.
Is it possible to over come a bad ﬁrst impr ession? Y es, it is.
Over the course of several meetings, you can sometimes
change a person’s initial per ception of you. But you’ll have
to work much har der than if you’d come acr oss as
charismatic fr om the start.
Why do split-second impr essions last for so long? One
reason is that, accor ding to economist John K enneth
Galbraith, when “ faced with the choice between changing
one’s mind and pr oving ther e is no need to do so, almost
everyone gets busy on the pr oof.”1 Behavioral r esear ch has
since pr oven him right. Once we’ve made a judgment about
someone, we spend the r est of our acquaintanceship
seeking to pr ove ourselves cor rect. Everything we see and
hear gets ﬁlter ed thr ough this initial impr ession. 2
If you mak e a favorable impr ession when ﬁrst meeting
someone, the r est of your r elationship will be color ed by it,
thereby tipping the scales in your favor . On the other hand,
an unfavorable ﬁrst impr ession can pr ove impossible to
overcome, of ten deciding the outcome of a meeting even if

--- PAGE 140 ---
the rest of the interaction is impeccable. Litigators know just
how much a client’s ﬁrst impr ession on a jury can aﬀect the
outcome of the trial, and of ten spend hours pr eparing them
for this ﬁrst moment. This is why, even if you’r e really late
to a meeting, it’s worth taking just thirty seconds to get
back into the right mental state and body
language. Otherwise you risk giving a very uncharismatic
ﬁrst impr ession.
The other r eason ﬁrst impr essions have such an impact is
that of ten they actually are right. In one study conducted at
the University of T exas at Austin, people wer e able to
accurately judge nine out of ten personality traits by looking
at a single photograph. The traits in question wer e
extroversion, openness, agr eeableness, conscientiousness,
emotional stability, lik ability, self -esteem, loneliness,
religiosity, and even political orientation.
“We have long known that people jump to conclusions
about others on the basis of very little infor mation,” said
one of the r esear chers, “but what’s striking about these
ﬁndings is how many of the impr essions have a k ernel of
truth to them, even on the basis of a single photograph.” 3
Further studies conﬁr med that we’r e often quite accurate
in our per ceptions of personality, even af ter meeting
someone for only a few seconds. 4 One Harvar d resear ch
team showed students a two -second silent clip of a teacher
they had never seen befor e, and ask ed them to evaluate the
teacher’s eﬀectiveness. The r esear chers then compar ed
these evaluations with those of students who’d e xperienced
this same teacher for a full semester . Both sets of
evaluations wer e impr essively similar . 5 This means that
without hearing a wor d from the teacher or attending one
class, complete strangers could pr edict with fair accuracy
the ratings this teacher would r eceive.
CEOs as well as human r esour ce pr ofessionals will of ten
admit that they decide whether they’ll hir e a job applicant
within the ﬁrst few seconds of the interview . As one senior

--- PAGE 141 ---
executive once told me, “The r est of the interview is just
window dr essing.”
The Harvar d team r ealized that ﬁrst impr essions ar e
generated by the fastest part of the brain, which is also the
most primitive. This r eptilian brain generates our instinctive,
primal r eﬂexes and may have been a k ey to our ancestors’
survival. In hunter -gather er times, we of ten had only a split
second to deter mine whether shapes entering our ﬁeld of
vision wer e animate or inanimate, human or nonhuman,
friend or foe—in other wor ds “ﬁght, ﬂight, or r elax?” Those
able to accurately mak e these split-second decisions
survived, thrived, and multiplied. Those who couldn’t ended
up as somebody else’s pr otein snack.
Today, even in sophisticated business settings, we still
operate on hunter -gather er survival instincts. When we ﬁrst
meet someone, our instinctive question is: friend or foe?
How friendly ar e their intentions lik ely to be? T o ﬁnd an
answer we still look to the clues that wer e so useful in tribal
times: appearance and demeanor .
If ther e’s any chance the person could be a foe, our ne xt
question is: ﬁght or ﬂight? If they did have ill intentions,
would they have the power to enact them? T o ﬁnd the
answer, our brain tries to deter mine which of us would win
in a ﬁght. W e tak e into consideration factors such as height
and size, age, and gender .
It’s only af ter both of these evaluations have tak en place
that the content of what we say and how we say it comes
into play .
The Golden Rule
So how can you mak e a fantastic ﬁrst impr ession? Our
default setting her e is actually quite simple: people lik e
people who ar e like them. During the vast majority of our
history, fr om which our cur rent instincts ar e drawn, people

--- PAGE 142 ---
lived in tribes. In such an envir onment, the ability to
accurately r ecognize whether or not someone was of your
tribe could have life-and-death implications. If you know
how to get these instinctive r esponses working in your
favor, you’ve won half the battle.
When people ar e similar in ter ms of attir e, appearance,
demeanor, and speech, they automatically assume they
share similar social backgr ounds, education, and even
values. They feel lik e part of the same tribe—or, as R udyar d
Kipling wr ote in The Jungle Book,  “We are of one blood, you
and I.”
Overall appearance is evaluated befor e demeanor and
body language. This may be because clothing can be seen
from farther away, and would help us deter mine mor e
quickly the lik elihood of the other person being friend or foe,
fellow tribesman or not. Clothing, essentially, is moder n-day
tribal wear .
Tribal W ear
Can you imagine a U.S. pr esident delivering the State of the
Union addr ess in a bathr obe? Of course not. No matter how
hard we try to be objective, clothing matters. The e xact
same speech will be per ceived very diﬀer ently when
deliver ed in a suit versus a bathr obe.
One Danish manager told me: “I’ve found that the mor e
formal my clothing is, the mor e respect my opinions get!”
For him, the diﬀer ence is striking. P resenting the very same
opinion in casual clothing one day and in a suit the ne xt
produced dramatically diﬀer ent results. In the ﬁrst case, he
says, “people bar ely listened.” In the second, “everyone
listened and I got my way .”
In the 1970s, when young adults’ dr ess styles tended to
fall into either the “hippie” or the “straight” category,
resear chers e xperimented with the eﬀects of clothing

--- PAGE 143 ---
choice. They appr oached college students on a campus,
sometimes wearing hippie clothes and other times wearing
straight clothes, and ask ed for change to mak e a phone call.
When they wer e dressed in the same style as the student,
the student said yes two -thirds of the time. When they wer e
dressed in the opposite style, the student said yes less than
half the time. 6
One company that understood this principle and used it to
its advantage was American Expr ess. They made their ﬁrst
good move when they started sending their salespeople to
college campuses dr essed lik e college students. They then
went one step further . They didn’t just dress them lik e
students, they hired students. And that’s when they saw
their sales rates soar .
Putting It into Practice: T ribal W ear
Blend in or stand out? The answer depends on your
goals. If you want to mak e others feel comfortable,
adapt to their tribal wear . IBM managers, when sending
their salespeople to call on traditional corporate clients,
were known to tell them, “Y ou can wear anything you
want, as long as it’s a navy blue suit.”
You wouldn’t wear a Hawaiian shirt in an investment
bank, nor would you wear a thr ee-piece suit in a start-
up. Dr ess codes can vary even within the same industry
—a tax lawyer might not wear the same suit as an
entertainment lawyer .
If you want to impr ess others, look at the range of
choices within that envir onment and choose the upper
end. Ther e’s a r eason the phrase “ Dress to impr ess”
exists.

--- PAGE 144 ---
It’s worth doing your r esear ch. If you’r e going to a party,
call the host; if you’r e going on a job interview, go by the
oﬃce a few days befor e to see what people coming in and
out of it ar e wearing.
On my ﬁrst visit to Oracle, I made the mistak e of showing
up in a New Y ork–style black business suit. Oracle was not
only a W est Coast ﬁr m (read: casual) but a high-tech one to
boot; they quickly advised me to lose the suit. These days,
when I’m leading consulting pr ojects at the Google
headquarters, I blend in with jeans, while the brilliant
engineers I coach slouch ar ound in shorts, T -shirts, and ﬂip-
ﬂops.
The Power of a Good Handshak e
A Fortune 500 CEO once said that when he had to choose
between two candidates with similar qualiﬁcations, he gave
the position to the candidate with the better handshak e.
Extreme? P erhaps, but management e xperts at the
University of Iowa analyzing interactions in job interviews
declar ed handshak es “mor e important than agr eeableness,
conscientiousness, or emotional stability .”7 Other studies
deter mined that a handshak e impr oves the quality of the
interaction, pr oducing a higher degr ee of intimacy and trust
within a matter of seconds.
I often tell my clients that no matter how e xpensive their
suit, watch, or briefcase, if their handshak e is bad, their ﬁrst
impression will tak e a hit. The right handshak e costs far less
and will do far mor e for you than a designer suit can. Having
a great handshak e is critical to authority charisma—can you
imagine a powerful ﬁgur e with a limp, weak handshak e?
Though it may seem inconsequential, a handshak e is
indeed a serious step in intimacy . The physical contact
involved r equir es that the personal space bar rier be
suspended, if only for a moment. It ther efore requir es trust.

--- PAGE 145 ---
If the trust is validated (the handshak e goes well), the ﬁrst
step in a r elationship is made.
The ﬁrst commonly known depiction of a handshak e was
found in Egyptian fr escoes dating back to ar ound 2800 B.C.
To this day, acr oss cultur es and hemispher es, the handshak e
remains surprisingly common—and always featur es the
right hand. Since that was the one traditionally used for
wielding weapons, shaking the right hand was symbolic of a
suspension of danger, showing that the gr eeter’s weapon
hand was unar med.
In Roman times, the handshak e was in fact an ar m clasp.
Each man would clasp just below the elbow of the other .
This gestur e aﬀor ded a better opportunity to feel for
daggers hidden in sleeves. Medieval knights took
precautions a step further by adding a shak e to the clasp to
dislodge any hidden weapons, and thus the handshak e was
born.
Of the many handshak e blunders people can mak e, let’s
discuss the worst oﬀenders.
The Dead Fish:  This is per haps the worst. Her e, a limp,
lifeless hand is e xtended and just bar ely shak en. This
handshak e can ruin a meeting befor e it even begins. And,
unfortunately, I have met scor es of women with this
particular aﬄiction.
The Knuckle Cruncher:  This grip may be a
demonstration of machismo, but it could also be the r esult
of a person genuinely unawar e of his (or her) str ength.
Alternatively, it might be the r esult of misguided teachings
—some women have been taught that the str onger their
grip, the mor e seriously they will be tak en. Hence, they
conclude that they should clamp down as if their life
depended on it.
The Dominant:  In this case, the hand is e xtended palm
down, per haps conveying the intention of having the upper
hand in the interaction. A variation of this shak e would be
The T wisting Dominant,  wher e the hand is e xtended

--- PAGE 146 ---
innocently straight outwar d, but twists once the shak e is
initiated to gain the upper hand.
The T wo-Handed:  We’ll close this woeful list with the
classic two -handed handshak e. In this case, you’ll feel your
partner’s lef t hand at work, closing in on your right hand,
wrist, ar m, shoulder, or neck. It’s also known as The
Politician’s Handshak e, which gives you an idea of how
little r egard people have for those who pr oﬀer it. The only
exception is when the person you’r e meeting is alr eady a
good friend, and even then I’d r eserve it for those times
when you want to convey special war mth (to be used
sparingly).
Many of my clients wer e shock ed to lear n that they’d been
guilty of one of the above without r ealizing it, and in doing
so lost charisma points befor e they had even said a wor d.
So what, then, ar e the ingr edients for a perfect handshak e?
Check out the bo x below for the ten components of a gold-
star handshak e.
Putting It into Practice:  
The Perfect Handshak e
Follow these ten steps to get it right every time, or go
online to http://www .CharismaMyth.com/handshak e to
see a step-by -step live demonstration of good, bad, and
absolutely gr eat handshak es.
1. First things ﬁrst: mak e sur e your right hand is fr ee.
Shift anything it may be holding to your lef t hand
well in advance. Y ou don’t want to have to fumble at
the last moment.
2. Avoid holding a drink in your right hand, especially if
it’s a cold drink, as the condensation will mak e your
hand feel cold and clammy .

--- PAGE 147 ---
3. Befor e shaking someone’s hand, whether you ar e a
man or a woman, rise if you’r e seated. And k eep
your hands out of your pock ets: visible hands mak e
you look mor e open and honest.
4. Make sur e to use plenty of eye contact, and smile
warmly but brieﬂy : too much smiling could mak e
you appear over eager .
5. Keep your head straight, without tilting it in any
way, and face the person fully .
6. Keep your hand perfectly perpendicular, neither
dominant (palm down) nor submissive (palm up). If
you’r e in doubt, angle your thumb straight to the
ceiling.
7. Open wide the space between your thumb and
index ﬁnger to mak e sur e you get optimal thumb-
web contact.
8. Ensur e contact between the palms of your hands by
keeping your palm ﬂat—not cupped—and by draping
your hand acr oss your partner’s diagonally .
9. Try to wrap your ﬁngers ar ound your partner’s hand,
scaling them one by one, as if you wer e giving a hug
with your hand. Y ou will almost have your inde x
ﬁnger on their pulse— almost,  but not quite.
10. Once full contact is made, lock your thumb down
and squeeze ﬁr mly, about as much as your partner
does. Shak e from the elbow (not the wrist), linger
for a moment if you want to convey particular
warmth, and step back.

--- PAGE 148 ---
Several of my clients have come back to me amazed by
what a diﬀer ence a good handshak e mak es. Practice with
friends or family—people who will give you truly candid
feedback. Have them r ead this section. (And r emember,
everything her e is North American speciﬁc.)
So you’ve made a fantastic ﬁrst impr ession. Y ou’ve given
a great handshak e. You walk up to them and what happens
next? You speak. Charismatic conversationalists know how
to start conversations easily, mak e people feel special, and
end conversations gracefully . Let’s see how you can cr eate
positive associations fr om start to ﬁnish, fr om the way you
open a conversation to the way you e xit it.
Break the Ice
An easy way to start interactions in a way that both
communicates war mth and sends the conversation down
the right path is to oﬀer a compliment about something the
person is wearing. This would be a gr eat opener when
you’r e aiming to br oadcast either kindness charisma or
focus charisma. It can also be a good way to balance out the
power in your authority charisma if you think a mor e
subdued version of your power is needed.
Continue with an open-ended question, such as “What’s
the story behind it?” The wor d story  has a very str ong
emotional eﬀect on most people—it sends them straight
into storytelling mode, which instantly changes the rapport
between the two of you. In addition, because they chose to
wear this item, they most lik ely have a positive feeling
about it.
Another good question to br eak the ice with is “Wher e are
you fr om?” No matter what the answer, it will encourage
further dialogue. Whether they answer “New Y ork” or “New
Delhi,” if you’r e not fr om that ar ea, you can follow up with
“What was it lik e growing up ther e?” The smaller the town

--- PAGE 149 ---
of origin, the mor e delighted they will be that you have
expressed inter est.
To keep people talking, simply ask open-ended questions,
such as “What br ought you her e tonight?” or “ How ar e you
connected to this event?” Closed questions, by contrast, can
be answer ed by yes or no, and once answer ed, they land
you right back wher e you started, trying to think of
something else to k eep the conversation going.
Aim to k eep your questions focused on positive subjects
because people will associate you with whatever feelings
your conversation generates. Instinctively, you would
probably know to avoid asking “So how’s the divor ce
going?” Instead, focus on questions that will lik ely elicit
positive emotions. W ith your questions, you have the power
to lead the conversation in the dir ection you want.
If they start asking about you and you want to r efocus the
conversation on them, use the bounce back  technique.
Answer the question with a fact, add a personal note, and
redirect the question to them, as follows:
Other P erson: “So wher e are you moving to?”
You: “T o Chelsea [fact]. W e fell in love with the parks and
the bak eries [personal note]. What do you think of the
neighbor hood [r edirect]?”
Remember, it’s all about k eeping the spotlight on them for
as long as possible. “T alk to a man about himself, and he
will listen for hours,” said Benjamin Disraeli. In fact, even
when you’r e speaking, the one wor d that should pop up
most of ten in your conversation is not I but you. Instead of
saying “I r ead a gr eat article on that subject in the New Y ork
Times, ” try “Y ou might enjoy the r ecent New Y ork T imes
article on the subject.” Or simply insert “Y ou know…” befor e
any sentence to mak e them instantly perk up and pay
attention.
To mak e yourself even mor e relatable, adjust your choice
of wor ds, your br eadth and depth of vocabulary, and your
expressions to suit your audience: focus on their ﬁelds of

--- PAGE 150 ---
interest and choose metaphors fr om those domains. If
they’r e into golf and you want to talk about success, speak
of hitting a hole in one. If they sail, a catastr ophe becomes a
shipwr eck.
One of my clients, a Deutsche Bank analyst, told me she
couldn’t seem to establish a good r elationship with her boss.
She described him as rather brusque, almost militaristic in
his demeanor, “and, in fact, he of ten uses battle language in
our daily interactions.” That, to me, was just the clue we
needed. I suggested adopting military analogies in which
she would lik en herself to a “loyal soldier ” or a “good
lieutenant,” and gradually incr easing the use of military
vocabulary in their conversations. W ithin a week, she told
me that their interactions had signiﬁcantly impr oved—he
now seemed to r egard her as “ one of his people,” and
someone he could count on. This was a high r eturn on
investment for just adding a few wor ds to her vocabulary!
Graceful Exits
Just as a ﬁrst impr ession can color the r est of the
interaction, so can the last few moments. Becoming a
charismatic conversationalist means that people will r eally
enjoy being ar ound you, and may be incr easingly r eluctant
to let you go . In fact, the mor e charismatic you become, the
harder it will be to escape your newfound fans. Many
charismatic people mention this as one of their biggest
challenges. So how can you gracefully e xit a conversation?
First, don’t wait too long to end it. Otherwise, you and
your partner will feel the strain and become uncomfortable.
The easiest way to e xit is, of course, to have an oﬃcial
reason for doing so . That’s one of the many r easons to be a
volunteer or acquir e some oﬃcial duty at parties. When
you’r e “on duty,” people will actually e xpect you to spend
no mor e than a few minutes with them.

--- PAGE 151 ---
Another way to e xit a conversation with grace is to oﬀer
something of value:
Information: an article, book, or W eb site you think
might be of use to them
A connection: someone they ought to meet whom you
know and can intr oduce them to
Visibility : an or ganization you belong to, wher e you
could invite them to speak
Recognition: an awar d you think they should be
nominated for
Oﬀering value will of ten cr eate in others a feeling of
warmth and goodwill towar d you, and your departur e from
the conversation will be haloed by the impr ession of
gener osity you’ve cr eated.
Wait until your conversation partner has ﬁnished a
sentence, and say something to the eﬀect of, “Y ou know,
based on what you’ve just said, you r eally should check out
this W eb site. If you have a car d, I’ll send you the link.” As
soon as your counterpart gives you a business car d, you
have the perfect opportunity to say, “ Great! I’ll e-mail you
soon. It was a pleasur e meeting you.”
Alternatively, if the person has agr eed to meet someone
in the r oom, simply say, “ Let me intr oduce you,” and bring
them together . Because you’ve just gener ously given them
something, your conversation partner can’t help but have
positive feelings for you. Y ou can also draw others into the
conversation as they pass by—a gr oup of thr ee or four is
always easier to tak e leave of .
What if you’r e the one br eaking up a gr oup? P erhaps
you’r e rescuing someone fr om a conversation they’ve
indicated they wanted to leave, or you need to intr oduce
them to someone else, or one of the gr oup is needed for
another duty .

--- PAGE 152 ---
In this case, focus all your attention, with particularly
warm eye contact (see chapter 9  for this), not on the person
you’r e taking with you but on the person who is being lef t
behind. This minimizes the chances of their feeling e xcluded
and is particularly important for conveying either kindness
charisma or focus charisma.
A good way to phrase things is: “I’m so sorry, but
Christopher is needed to [ﬁll in the blank]. W ould you allow
me to bring him over ther e?” This also gives them at least a
nominal feeling of having a choice in the matter .
Once a conversation is over, don’t waste time wor rying
about what you said, what you wish you hadn’t said, or what
you’ll say ne xt time. As the MIT Media Lab studies showed,
what impacts people isn’t the wor ds or content used.
Rather, they r emember how it felt to be speaking with you.
You might not r emember the e xact content of
conversations you had a week ago, but you pr obably do
remember how they felt. It’s not the wor ds but the
conversation’s emotional imprint that r emains. And if you
use all the tools we’ve just cover ed, the emotional imprint
will be simply splendid.
KEY T AKEA WAYS
 First impr essions happen within seconds and can aﬀect
not only the r est of the interaction but also the r est of
your r elationship with that person.
 People feel most comfortable with those who ar e similar to
them in some way, including appearance and behavior . Do
your homework and decide how much you want to adapt
your dr ess and wor d choice to your envir onment.
 A good handshak e can go a long way . Likewise, a bad one
can leave an unfavorable and lasting ﬁrst impr ession. It’s
worth spending some time perfecting the right way to
greet someone.

--- PAGE 153 ---
 Great conversationalists k eep the spotlight on the other
person and mak e them feel good about themselves.
 Know how to gracefully e xit a conversation, leaving others
with positive feelings.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 154 ---
8
Speaking—and Listening—  
with Charisma
AS WE’VE SEEN , body language and other nonverbal signals can
emit a variety of messages and can be used to pr oject
charisma even befor e a single wor d is spok en. Managing a
charismatic mental state is the ﬁrst step, but this chapter
will reveal speciﬁc verbal and vocal techniques to
successfully br oadcast your charismatic mental state. Y ou’ll
learn how to communicate pr esence when listening, and
power and war mth when speaking.
Charismatic Listening
When I ask my clients to name the ﬁrst skill they would
improve upon in their people if they could wave a magic
wand, most of the CEOs say, “ Better listening skills.” They
may not sound comple x or glamor ous, but listening skills
are an absolute r equir ement for charisma, and most
charisma masters possess them in abundance. By being a
great listener you can mak e people feel completely hear d
and understood without saying a wor d. In fact, it’s
remark ably easy to impr ess people just by listening
attentively .
We’re about to cover thr ee keys to communicating
presence: attentive listening, r efraining fr om inter rupting,
and deliberate pausing. Listening comes ﬁrst and for emost,

--- PAGE 155 ---
because listening lays the gr oundwork for the pr esence that
is fundamental to charisma.
John F . Kennedy was known as a “superb listener ” who
made others feel lik e he was “ with them completely .” Great
listening skills helped him pay e xtremely close attention to
the feelings of whomever he was interacting with, enabling
him to establish rapport on a very deep, emotional level. 1
I’m sur e you know that listening is important. But did you
know that just a few tweaks can bring your listening skills
from good to truly e xtraor dinary? Gr eat listening skills start
with the right mindset: both the willingness and the mental
ability to be pr esent, pay attention, and focus on what the
other person is saying. As you can imagine, this is
absolutely k ey for conveying focus charisma, though it can
boost any of the other charisma styles, too .
One of the most common mistak es my clients mak e is
equating listening with “letting people talk until it’s my
turn.” Sor ry, but that’s not suﬃcient. Even if the other
person is doing all the talking, you can’t let your mind
wander while waiting for your tur n to speak. Even if what
you’r e thinking about is what you want to say ne xt, your
lack of pr esence will be written all over your face. The other
person will see that you’r e not fully pr esent and ar e just
waiting for them to ﬁnish so you can jump in.
Presence is a cor nerstone of eﬀective listening. Y ou
already have all the tools you need to avoid mind-wandering
while someone else is talking:
If zoning out is the issue, bring yourself back to the
moment by focusing on physical sensations, lik e the
feeling in your toes or your br eath ﬂowing in and out of
your body .
If impatience is the issue, handle it by delving into  the
minute physical sensations you’r e feeling. Then get
back to the person.

--- PAGE 156 ---
Once you have the right mindset, how do you ensur e the
right behaviors? Eﬀective listening means behaving in a way
that mak es whomever you’r e speaking with feel truly
understood.
Good  listeners know never, ever to inter rupt—not even if
the impulse to do so comes fr om e xcitement about
something the other person just said. No matter how
congratulatory and war m your input, it will always r esult in
their feeling at least a twinge of r esentment or frustration at
not having been allowed to complete their sentence. One of
my clients told me: “This one practice alone is worth its
weight gold. T o stop inter rupting others could be the single
most important skill I’ve lear ned fr om working with you.”
Great listeners know to let others inter rupt them. When
someone inter rupts you, let them! W ere they right to
interrupt you? Of course not. But even if they wer e wrong,
it’s not worth making them feel wr ong; your job instead is to
make them feel right. In fact, if you notice the other person
repeatedly agitating to speak, k eep your sentences short
and leave fr equent pauses for them to jump in.
People r eally do love to hear themselves talk. The mor e
you let them speak, the mor e they will lik e you. One young
executive told me: “In job interviews, I’ve gotten oﬀers
simply by going in for an interview and letting the
interviewer talk for ninety per cent of the time. I walk out
and they absolutely love me since we talk ed about what
matter ed most to them.”
Master  listeners know one e xtra trick, one simple but
extraor dinarily eﬀective habit that will mak e people feel
truly listened to and understood: they pause befor e they
answer . The pianist Artur Schnabel once said, “The notes I
handle no better than many pianists. But the pauses
between the notes—ah, that is wher e the art r esides.” 2
Knowing how and when to pause is also an art in business
conversations, and something that most charismatic
conversationalists do naturally . Consider ed a k ey tool in

--- PAGE 157 ---
negotiation, pausing can also play a wonderful r ole in
making people feel good about themselves when they’r e
around you—it’s an easy way to mak e people feel
intelligent, inter esting, and even impr essive.
When someone has spok en, see if you can let your facial
expression r eact ﬁrst, showing that you’r e absorbing what
they’ve just said and giving their brilliant statement the
consideration it deserves. Only then, af ter about two
seconds, do you answer . The sequence goes lik e this:
They ﬁnish their sentence
Your face absorbs
Your face r eacts
Then, and only then, you answer
Now, I’m not saying this is easy . It tak es conﬁdence to
bear silence, both because of the awkwar dness you may
feel and because of the uncertainty of not knowing what
they’r e thinking during those two seconds. But it’s worth it.
Several of my clients told me that this one simple technique
had a major impact for them. The people they interacted
with seemed to feel mor e relaxed and better understood,
and they wer e willing to shar e mor e and open up—a high
return for just two seconds of patience.
Great listening skills will give you pr esence—the
foundation of charisma—and boost any charisma style. Now
that you’ve laid a solid foundation for communicating
presence, let’s move on to communicating charismatic
warmth and power .
Charismatic Speaking
Imagine yourself one mor ning in a hur ry to get to work. Y ou
scramble thr ough your r outine, rush out the door, and at the
very ﬁrst str eet cor ner, while waiting for the r ed light to tur n
green, you witness a deadly traﬃc collision. F rom now on,

--- PAGE 158 ---
what ar e you going to think of whenever you pass that
corner? The accident, of course. It would be nearly
impossible to pass that speciﬁc str eet cor ner without
thinking of it. Y ou might r emember the feelings of hor ror and
dread or the way your blood seemed to tur n to ice in your
veins.
Our minds link the sensations we’r e experiencing to the
places, people, and physical sensations we notice while
we’re experiencing them. This is why car manufactur ers
often include highly attractive female models in the ads
promoting their cars. (It works: in a study, men ask ed to
evaluate cars whose ads featur ed attractive female models
rated the cars  as faster, cooler, and mor e desirable.) 3
The same association happens with negative feelings,
which is why TV weather for ecasters of ten receive hate mail
from viewers who so str ongly associate the meteor ologists
with the weather they r eport that they believe these folks
actually cause the weather . It’s not unusual during nasty
seasons for a for ecaster to r eceive at least one death
threat. 4
Now imagine a big corporation in which one employee
(say, the human r esour ces dir ector) is r esponsible for all
employee ter mination. Whenever people think of her, they
immediately think of the negative associations tied to her
job duties. In fact, the long-ter m negative eﬀects of such
associations ar e so well-known that an entir e industry
developed ar ound being the bear ers of bad news—ﬁring
people, closing plants, etc. These specialized ﬁr ms will come
in to deliver the blow, serve as the focal point for people’s
resentment, and then leave, pr esumably taking the worst of
the negative associations along with them.
Have you ever hear d the phrase “ Don’t shoot the
messenger ”? Back in ancient P ersia, a messenger would be
dispatched af ter a battle to bring the king news of either
victory or defeat. If the messenger r eported victory, he was
treated to a feast. But if he came bearing news of failur e, he

--- PAGE 159 ---
was immediately e xecuted. Though we no longer e xecute
people on a whim, the underlying basis for this custom
remains: people will associate you with whatever feelings
you pr oduce in them on a consistent basis.
In 1904, Ivan P avlov (who would later go on to win the
Nobel P rize) was studying the pr ocess of digestion in
animals; in this case, the dogs k ept at his laboratory . To call
the dogs’ attention once their food had been put out, he
would ring a bell. As he was idly playing with the bell one
day, he noticed a curious phenomenon: just by hearing the
sound of the bell, the dogs not only rushed up to the usual
feeding place but also started dr ooling.
Many cat owners will tell you that they bar ely have to
start opening a can of cat food for their feline to appear at
its bowl. As it tur ns out, we humans work e xactly the same
way. Are ther e certain songs that mak e you feel ener gized?
How about one that mak es you feel nostalgic and misty -
eyed? Have you ever been br ought back to a speciﬁc
moment fr om your childhood just by e xperiencing a certain
taste or smell?
We associate feelings with sights, sounds, tastes, smells,
places, and, of course, people, which is why others will
associate you with the way you mak e them feel. F or most
charisma, but especially kindness charisma, it’s critical to
make others feel good about themselves. Benjamin
Disraeli’s genius was his ability to mak e whomever he was
speaking with feel intelligent and fascinating. P eople would
associate the wonderful way they felt ar ound him with the
man himself .
Because we’r e constantly cr eating associations in people’s
minds, it’s crucial in both business and social situations to
be awar e of how you’r e making people feel. T o be
charismatic, you need to cr eate str ong positive associations
and avoid cr eating negative ones.
When one of the world’s lar gest accounting ﬁr ms ask ed
me to coach their “ rising stars,” I was struck by how

--- PAGE 160 ---
earnest, har dworking, and well-intentioned these bright
young managers wer e. Chosen for their high level of
knowledge and competence, they served a two -year ter m in
the ﬁr m’s headquarters befor e returning to their local
oﬃces. And yet they wer e intensely dislik ed by the r est of
the ﬁr m.
During these two years, the young managers served as
experts for all local oﬃces, who would tur n to them in
diﬃcult situations, e.g., when questions wer e trick y or when
things had gone wr ong. Because they spent their time
ﬁnding mistak es and pr oviding the right answers (or
explaining what the answer should have been), these back-
oﬃce e xperts had become associated with diﬃcult
situations and unpleasant feelings.
You can imagine how har d it was af terwar d for the r est of
the ﬁr m to be war m and welcoming to these same e xperts
when they “ repatriated” to the very oﬃces whose failings
they’d had to point out. T alk about bad associations!
Because of this setup, making others feel supported and
being positively associated was a challenge for these rising
stars.
To reverse this negative connotation and br oadcast as
much war mth as possible, we work ed to ensur e that they
communicated a better ratio of neutral or good news to bad
news. They lear ned to highlight what people had done right;
they started sending out e-mail updates with useful tips,
and would even include a “k udos” section to congratulate
any local oﬃce that had done a good job. These techniques
helped them use their high-status position as e xperts to
give their war mth and praise even mor e weight.
Take a Compliment
We often impair our war mth with negative associations
without even r ealizing it. Negative associations can happen

--- PAGE 161 ---
anytime someone feels bad when they’r e around us, and
they ar e a particular risk if we mak e people feel bad about
themselves—wr ong, inadequate, or stupid.
How do you feel when someone pays you a compliment?
For instance, when someone says you look good or you
have accomplished something impr essive, do you
instinctively downplay it? F or many people, compliments
feel both pleasant and a little awkwar d, and they don’t quite
know how to handle them. Many of us either tur n bashful or
modestly deﬂect the compliment by saying something lik e
“Oh, it’s nothing…”
Unfortunately, doing this sends a message to your
admir er that they wer e wrong to compliment you. They will
probably feel rather foolish, and ther e’s even a chance that
they will associate this e xperience of feeling foolish with
you. If you do this enough, pr etty soon they’ll stop trying. If,
on the other hand, you mak e them feel good for
complimenting you, they’ll enjoy feeling good about
themselves, and so will want to do it again.
The ne xt time you’r e given a compliment, the following
steps will help you skillfully handle the moment:
1. Stop.
2. Absorb the compliment. Enjoy it if you can.
3. Let that second of absorption show on your face. Show
the person that they’ve had an impact.
4. Thank them. Saying “Thank you very much” is enough,
but you can tak e it a step further by thanking them for
their thoughtfulness or telling them that they’ve made
your day .
Imagine giving a compliment to Bill Clinton. How do you
think he would tak e it? I’d been making this suggestion to
clients for some time when one of my friends told me he’d
had that e xact e xperience in person, when the for mer
president was touring Google’s headquarters:

--- PAGE 162 ---
Seeing him come down the hall, I wanted to
approach him but had only a second to come up
with something to say other than just “ Hi!” I found
myself saying, “Uh, thank you for your service to
this country .” He paused and look ed thoughtful for a
second, as if the idea had never occur red to him.
Then he appear ed to let it sink in as if it wer e the
kindest thing anyone had ever said to him. His
shoulders dr opped, he got this big “aw, shucks”
smile, and he r esponded as though he were a
starstruck Cub Scout and I were the pr esident: “ Oh,
it was an honor .” What a way to tak e a compliment!
He really nailed it perfectly .
Creating positive associations to highlight the war mth
dimension means that you mak e a person feel good when
they’r e around you. Clinton is known to mak e everyone he’s
speaking to feel as if they were the most important person
in the r oom. How can you mak e people feel this way?
First, think about how you would behave if you wer e
indeed speaking to the most important person in the r oom.
You would pr obably want to hear everything they had to say .
You’d be truly inter ested, maybe even impr essed, and that
attitude is e xactly what will mak e people feel gr eat about
themselves and associate all those feelings with you.
As Dale Car negie said, “Y ou can mak e mor e friends in two
months by becoming truly inter ested in other people than
you can in two years by trying to get other people
interested in you.” 5 One gr eat trick is to imagine that the
person you’r e speaking with is the main star in a movie
you’r e watching right now . This will help you ﬁnd them mor e
interesting, and ther e’s even a chance that you’ll mak e
them feel lik e a movie star, too . Charismatic people ar e
masters at using positive associations, whether consciously
or subconsciously, and you’ll of ten hear people rave about

--- PAGE 163 ---
how “special” and “ wonderful” these charismatics made
them feel.
I tell all my clients: Don’t try to impr ess people. L et them
impress you, and they will love you for it. Believe it or not,
you don’t need to sound smart. Y ou just need to mak e them
feel smart.
Get Graphic
If you wer e told the number of deaths caused by smoking
every year, would you r emember that e xact ﬁgur e three
months fr om now? P robably not. But what if you wer e told
that this ﬁgur e was equal to thr ee fully loaded Boeing 747
planes crashing into the earth every day for a year, with no
survivors? That image you’d r emember for a while. *
A pictur e is worth a thousand wor ds, indeed—and for good
reason. Image generation has a powerful impact on
emotions and physiological states and a high impact on
brain function. 6 Our brain’s language-pr ocessing abilities ar e
much newer and less deeply wir ed than ar e our visual-
processing abilities. When you speak in wor ds, the brain has
to relate the wor ds to concepts, then translate the concepts
into images, which is what actually gets understood. Why
not speak dir ectly in the brain’s own language? Whenever
you can, choose to speak in pictur es. You’ll have a much
greater impact, and your message will be far mor e
memorable.
Visionary charismatics mak e full use of the power of
images. P residents rated as charismatic, such as F ranklin
Delano R oosevelt and Abraham Lincoln, used twice as many
visual metaphors in their inaugural addr esses as did those
rated as noncharismatic. 7
When Steve Jobs launched the iP od Nano, he needed a
dramatic way to illustrate its small size and light weight.
First, he pulled it out of the smallest pock et of his jeans,

--- PAGE 164 ---
giving tangible pr oof of just how small and slim it was.
Second, he compar ed the Nano’s weight to eight quarters:
his pr esentation slide shows the iP od on one side and eight
quarters on the other .
During Chrysler’s r emark able tur naround, L ee Iacocca
initiated a series of factory closings, which of course meant
that thousands of work ers would be ﬁr ed. To mitigate the
emotional backlash that could have ensued, he used a
battle metaphor, comparing himself to an ar my sur geon, a
job he called “the toughest assignment in the world.” In the
midst of battle, with wounded men everywher e, doctors
must prioritize which ones to attend to . This is called triage:
helping those with the best chances of survival and ignoring
the rest.
With this one metaphor, Iacocca made people feel that
the plant closings wer e painful for everyone but done in the
general good inter est, and that he himself was in the
trenches with his men, a lifesaver tr eating an or ganization
at war .
When you craf t your images and metaphors, try to mak e
them sensory -rich: involve as many of the ﬁve senses as
possible. Believe it or not, you can do this in almost any
situation, even with the driest of subjects.
One of the afor ementioned accounting ﬁr m’s rising stars
asked me to help him communicate the importance of a
comple x new r egulation in such a way that everyone would
realize just how critical it was to ensur e clients’ abidance.
Here’s the metaphor we came up with: “If you don’t bring
your clients into compliance, it’s as if they’r e innocently
paddling along a river, and you know ther e’s a waterfall
coming, yet you do nothing to stop them fr om going over
the waterfall, watching as they crash down to the r ocks
below, their bodies mangled, blood spilling thr ough the
water .” Harsh? Y es. Eﬀective? Y ou bet.
Of course, you’ll want to tak e great car e in choosing the
right metaphor for your particular goal. In the pr evious

--- PAGE 165 ---
example, we wanted to shock people and frighten them into
remembering something important. I was quite comfortable
in suggesting a rather unpleasant metaphor . Be awar e of
the emotional tenor of your metaphor and choose
accor dingly .
Avoid White Elephants
This tendency of the brain to think in pictur es can
sometimes be pr oblematic. Once an image is imagined, it’s
nearly impossible to unimagine it. R emember the white
elephants e xercise? When entr eated to not think of a white
elephant, your brain sooner or later (usually sooner) will
focus e xactly on what you want to avoid.
One young CEO told me: “W e’ve had some r evenue
trouble. When I talk ed about it with my team, I would
occasionally use the phrase ‘It’s nothing that will sink the
company .’ One of my employees told me that every time I
said that, it made him imagine the company sinking. I
stopped using the phrase.”
It’s not just metaphors that can paint the wr ong pictur e.
Some common phrases can have the same eﬀect. When you
tell someone, “No pr oblem,” “ Don’t wor ry,” or “ Don’t
hesitate to call,” for e xample, ther e’s a chance their brain
will remember “pr oblem,” “ worry,” or “hesitate” instead of
your desir e to support them. T o counter this negative eﬀect,
use phrases lik e “We’ll tak e car e of it” or “ Please feel fr ee to
call anytime.”
Deliver High V alue
Attention is a pr ecious r esour ce, just lik e time and money .
Anytime you ask people to listen to what you say or r ead
what you’ve written, you’r e asking them to spend  both their

--- PAGE 166 ---
time and their attention on you. Y ou’re asking them to give
you some of their r esour ces.
What ar e you giving them in r eturn? Whenever people ar e
asked to e xpend any of their scar ce resour ces, you can bet
that they ar e (at least subconsciously) measuring the r eturn
on their investment. Y ou can deliver value to others in
multiple ways:
Entertainment:  Make your e-mail or meeting
enjoyable.
Information:  Give inter esting or infor mative content
that they can use.
Good feelings:  Find ways to mak e them feel important
or good about themselves.
The longer you speak, the higher the price you’r e making
them pay, so the higher the value ought to be. P rofessional
speak ers, when r ehearsing a new pr esentation, will of ten
have their ﬁrst attempt taped and transcribed, and then go
over each sentence, aiming to tighten their speech as much
as possible.
In fact, aiming to deliver high value for low eﬀort brings
together all the points we’ve cover ed in this section. When
you speak or write, use few wor ds and lots of pictur es, and
strive to mak e your communications useful, enjoyable, and
even entertaining.
Tuning Y our V oice
Voice ﬂuctuation is the foundation for both vocal war mth
and power . In 1995, Cor nell pr ofessor Stephen Ceci taught a
developmental psychology course in the fall and spring
semesters to about thr ee hundr ed students each time.
During the winter br eak that separated the two semesters,
he work ed to impr ove his pr esentation style. He r eceived
training to incr ease the ﬂuctuation of his tone of voice, to

--- PAGE 167 ---
use mor e gestur es while speaking, and to communicate an
overall body language of enthusiasm.
When spring came, he deliver ed a course that was
identical in content to the one he’d deliver ed in the fall. Ceci
and his colleagues even compar ed recordings of both sets of
lectur es to verif y that they wer e wor d-for-word copies. The
only diﬀer ences wer e the variations in his tone of voice and
the addition of gestur es. Grading policy, assigned te xtbook,
oﬃce hours, tests, and even the basic demographic pr oﬁle
of the class r emained the same.
And yet students rated all aspects of the spring semester
class and instructor far higher . Even the te xtbook was rated
better, gaining nearly 20 per cent higher appr oval ratings.
Spring semester students also believed they had lear ned far
more, even though their actual perfor mance on tests
remained identical to the perfor mance of the fall semester
students. Ceci himself was rated as mor e knowledgeable,
more open to others’ ideas, and better or ganized even
though (as he told me himself) none of these factors had
changed fr om the pr evious semester .
Studies have consistently shown that audience ratings of
a lectur e are mor e strongly inﬂuenced by delivery style than
by content. 8 Your voice is k ey to communicating both
warmth and power, but ther e isn’t just one charismatic
voice. Y ou can choose to play up diﬀer ent aspects of your
voice depending on what you want to convey and with
whom you’r e communicating.
When the MIT Media Lab concluded that they could
predict the success of sales calls without listening to a
single wor d, these ar e the only two measur ements they
needed:
Ratio of speaking to listening
Amount of voice ﬂuctuation

--- PAGE 168 ---
Earlier in this chapter, we e xplor ed how to balance
speaking with listening. The second important vocal featur e
is ﬂuctuation. The degr ee to which your voice ﬂuctuates
aﬀects your persuasiveness and your charisma. Incr easing
voice ﬂuctuation means making your voice vary in any of
the following ways: pitch (high or low), volume (loud or
quiet), tone (r esonant or hollow), tempo (fast or slow), or
rhythm (ﬂuid or staccato).
Putting It into Practice: V oice Fluctuation
You can gain gr eat insights into your own voice
ﬂuctuation by practicing sentences with a tape r ecorder.
Repeat a sentence several times with as wide a
variation in emotions as you can. T ry to say it with
authority, with anger, with sor row, with empathetic car e
and concer n, with war mth, and with enthusiasm.
Vocal Power
If your goal is to communicate power, set the pitch, tone,
volume, and tempo of your voice in the following ways:
Pitch and tone:  The lower, mor e resonant, and mor e
baritone your voice, the mor e impact it will have.
Volume:  One of the ﬁrst things an actor lear ns to do on
stage is to pr oject his voice, which means gaining the ability
to modulate its volume and aim it in such a tar geted way
that speciﬁc portions of the audience can hear it, even fr om
afar. One classic e xercise to hone your pr ojection skills is to
imagine that your wor ds ar e arrows. As you speak, aim
them at diﬀer ent gr oups of listeners.
Tempo:  A slow, measur ed tempo with fr equent pauses
conveys conﬁdence.

--- PAGE 169 ---
Putting It into Practice: V ocal Power
The guidelines below will help you br oadcast power
through your voice.
1. Speak slowly . Visualize the contrast between a
nervous, squeak y teenager speaking at high speed
and the slow, emphatic tone of a judge delivering a
verdict.
2. Pause. P eople who br oadcast conﬁdence of ten
pause while speaking. They will pause for a second
or two between sentences or even in the middle of a
sentence. This conveys the feeling that they’r e so
conﬁdent in their power, they trust that people
won’t inter rupt.
3. Drop intonation. Y ou know how a voice rises at the
end of a question? Just r eread the last sentence and
hear your voice go up at the end. Now imagine an
assertion: a judge saying “This case is closed.” F eel
how the intonation of the wor d closed  drops.
Lowering the intonation of your voice at the end of a
sentence br oadcasts power . When you want to
sound super conﬁdent, you can even lower your
intonation midsentence.
4. Check your br eathing. Mak e sur e you’r e breathing
deeply into your belly and inhale and e xhale
through your nose rather than your mouth.
Breathing thr ough your mouth can mak e you sound
breathless and anxious.
Vocal W armth

--- PAGE 170 ---
There’s only one thing you need to do in or der to pr oject
more war mth in your voice: smile. Smiling aﬀects how we
speak to such an e xtent that listeners in one study could
identif y sixteen diﬀer ent kinds of smiles based on sound
alone. 9 This is why it’s worth smiling even when on the
phone.
What about cases in which you don’t necessarily want to
smile? The good news is that you don’t need to actually
smile: of ten, just thinking about smiling is enough to give
your voice mor e war mth. Although ther e isn’t one single
way to achieve a charismatic delivery, her e’s an eﬀective
visual to simultaneously convey power and war mth. Imagine
that you’r e a pr eacher e xhorting your congr egation. Think of
the rich, r olling, r esonant voice of a pr eacher; he cares
about his people (war mth), and, in addition, he feels he has
the might of God behind him (power, authority, conﬁdence).
Now that you have the tools you need to communicate
presence, war mth, and power thr ough speaking and
listening, let’s tak e a look at body language.
KEY T AKEA WAYS
 Power, pr esence, and war mth ar e important for both
charismatic speaking and charismatic listening.
 Great listening skills ar e key to communicating
charismatic pr esence.
 Never inter rupt people, and occasionally pause a second
or two befor e you answer .
 People associate you with the feelings you pr oduce in
them. A void cr eating negative associations: don’t mak e
them feel bad or wr ong.
 Make people feel good, especially about themselves. Don’t
try to impr ess them—let them impr ess you, and they will
love you for it.

--- PAGE 171 ---
 Get graphic: use pictur es, metaphors, and sensory -rich
language to convey a compelling, charismatic message.
 Use as few wor ds as possible, and deliver as much value
as possible: entertainment, infor mation, or good feelings.
 To emanate vocal power, use a slow, measur ed tempo;
insert pauses between your sentences; and dr op your
intonation at the end.
 To emanate vocal war mth, you need to do only one thing:
smile, or even just imagine smiling.
* This image isn’t just powerful, it’s also frighteningly accurate. In the United
States alone, 530,000 people die each year fr om diseases caused by smoking.
This is equivalent to 1,325 crashes of a Boeing 747 (mor e than 3 crashes per
day).
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 172 ---
9
Charismatic Body Language
It was the last day of my vacation, and I intended to
enjoy every minute of it. I was str olling thr ough a
small park in the center of town, drinking in the sun,
when suddenly, something caught my attention.
Perched atop a white bandstand, a short, middle-
aged man was making an impassioned speech. A
crowd was quickly gathering, and somehow, I felt
myself being drawn in, too . Ther e was something in
the manner of his speaking—his e xpansive and
ﬂowing gestur es, the tempo of his speech—that was
captivating.
For mor e than forty minutes, his gr owing audience
and I wer e held spellbound. T o this day, I have no
idea what this man was speaking about. Y ou see,
this scene took place in a small town in Me xico—and
my Spanish was nearly none xistent.
FOR NEARL Y AN hour, R onald Riggio, one of charisma’s main
resear chers, had been fascinated, without understanding a
word of content. What  the speak er was saying was clearly
not important to his spellbinding power . How he was saying
it was enough.
Words ar e grasped ﬁrst by people’s cognitive minds, their
logical side, which gets to work on understanding their
meaning. Body language, in contrast, aﬀects us on a
visceral, emotional level. It’s this emotional level that you
need to access in or der to inspir e others to follow, car e for,
or obey you. Business guru Alan W eiss lik es to say, “ Logic

--- PAGE 173 ---
makes people think. Emotion mak es them act.” Which would
you rather have? If you speak only to people’s logical mind,
you’r e missing half the playing ﬁeld.
Charisma, which mak es us feel impr essed, inspir ed, or
thrillingly special, speaks to our emotional side. It bypasses
our logical thinking. Just as the feeling of awe goes beyond
our understanding and touches us at an emotional level, so
does charisma.
Nonverbal modes of communication ar e har dwired into
our brains much deeper than the mor e recent language-
processing abilities and they aﬀect us far mor e strongly .
When our verbal and nonverbal signals ar e in congruence
(when they “agr ee” with each other), the nonverbal
ampliﬁes the verbal. When they conﬂict, we tend to trust
the nonverbal over the verbal. If your body language is
anticharismatic, it doesn’t matter how gr eat your message
is. On the other hand, with the right body language you can
succeed even with an imperfect message.
In some situations, the delivery of a message has a much
greater impact than the message itself . For instance, the
Harvar d Business R eview  detailed r esear ch showing that
when negative perfor mance r eviews wer e accompanied by
positive body language, employees r eceived them far better
than they r eceived positive r eviews deliver ed with negative
body language. 1
Our tendency to r eact to how something is said mor e than
to what  is said is particularly str ong in high-stak es situations
—whether it’s trying to win a new client, impr ess a new
boss, or mak e a new friend.
In high-stak es situations we r eact mor e strongly to body
language than to wor ds because our ﬁght- or-ﬂight r esponse
activates and a mor e primal part of the brain tak es over .
This part of the brain does not dir ectly compr ehend wor ds or
ideas. Instead, it’s immediately impacted by body language.

--- PAGE 174 ---
Emotional Contagion
Your body language is particularly important if you’r e in a
position of leadership because of the pr ocess known as
emotional contagion . Behavioral scientists deﬁne this as
“the pr ocess by which the emotions e xpressed by one
individual ar e ‘caught’ by another .” Charismatic people ar e
known to be mor e “contagious”; they have a str ong ability
to transmit their emotions to others. As a leader, the
emotions conveyed by your body language, even during
brief, casual encounters, can have a ripple eﬀect thr ough
your team or even your entir e company .
This ripple eﬀect is due to the mir ror neur ons in our brain,
whose job it is to r eplicate or mir ror in our own mind the
emotions we observe in someone else. When we detect
someone else’s emotions thr ough their behaviors or facial
expressions, our mir ror neur ons r eproduce these emotions.
This is what mak es empathy possible.
I’m of ten called in by leaders with str ong personalities
who alr eady have powerful charisma and need to lear n how
to manage their emotional contagion. W e analyze what
impact they’r e having on whom, and then give them the
skills to contr ol it at will.
Let’s imagine that you interact with someone while in an
anxious emotional state. As they r ead your body language,
their mir ror neur ons ﬁr e up, mir roring that state. They go on
to meet someone else, r eplicating the pr ocess—and your
emotional state spr eads. Emotional contagion “triggers
arousal in others, in a sort of chain r eaction.” 2 Within
organizations, leaders’ emotions always pr opagate fastest
because people ar e strongly aﬀected by those in a position
of power (we can thank our survival instincts for this, too).
Through emotional contagion, your emotions can str ongly
aﬀect your followers’ eﬀectiveness.
When positive, emotional contagion can be a wonderful
thing. In contr olled e xperimental settings, leaders’ positive

--- PAGE 175 ---
emotional contagion was shown to impr ove not only their
followers’ moods, perfor mance, and eﬀectiveness but also
the followers’ per ception of the leaders’ eﬀectiveness. 3
Emotional contagion can of course have a cor responding
negative eﬀect, and it’s worth incr easing your awar eness of
your own inter nal states, as well as your skill in handling
your emotions, in or der to manage the consequences of this
propagation. Chapter 12  will help you do this.
The potency of your emotional contagion is one good
measur e of your level of charisma. When r esear ching Social
Intelligence,  author Daniel Goleman analyzed a video of
Herb K elleher, the charismatic cofounder of Southwest
Airlines, str olling thr ough the cor ridors of the airline’s hub.
Goleman said, “W e could practically see him activate the
oscillators in each person he encounter ed.”
Conscious Mirroring
Have you ever noticed that people who have been mar ried
for many years of ten end up looking lik e each other? It’s
actually a well-documented fact that as we spend time
together, we tend to adapt to each other’s body language. 4
This naturally includes our facial e xpressions, which end up
shaping our faces in similar ways by r epeatedly using the
same facial muscles.
This tendency to mimic the body language of others is
technically called limbic r esonance,  and it’s har dwired into
the human brain. Limbic r esonance is made possible thanks
to a certain class of neur ons called oscillators,  which
coordinate people physically by r egulating how and when
their bodies move together . Daniel Goleman details in the
Harvar d Business R eview  what happens when two
accomplished cellists play together . Not only do they hit
their notes in unison, but, thanks to oscillators, their right
brain hemispher es ar e mor e closely coor dinated to each

--- PAGE 176 ---
other’s than they ar e to the lef t hemispher es of their own
brains! 5
Imitating someone’s body language is an easy way to
establish trust and rapport. This technique, which is of ten
called mirroring  or mimicking,  is the conscious application of
something that many charismatic people do instinctively .
When you consciously mir ror someone’s body language,
you activate deep instincts of trust and liking. F or this
reason, it can be a great aid when you need people to open
up. A for mer political jour nalist mentioned how eﬀective
mirroring was during interviews. “ People get shar e-
oriented,” he told me. They just instinctively start sharing
more.
Several studies acr oss the world have found that mir roring
someone’s body language can get them to pick up your
dropped items, buy your pr oducts, or give you a better deal.
Mirroring even mak es you mor e attractive to others. 6
During your ne xt few conversations, try to mir ror the other
person’s overall postur e: the way they hold their head, how
they place their feet, the shif ts in their weight. If they move
their lef t hand, move your right hand. Aim also to adapt
your voice to theirs in speed, pitch, and intonation.
Because people focus primarily on themselves while
interacting, they usually won’t notice that you’r e mir roring
unless you ar e exceedingly obvious about it. However, her e
are some ways to incr ease subtlety :
Be selective: do only what feels natural to you. F or
instance, some gestur es ar e gender -speciﬁc.
Use variations in amplitude: if they mak e a big gestur e,
you could mak e a smaller one.
Use lag time: let a few seconds elapse befor e you move
into a mir rored position.
Over the years, I’ve had the privilege to coach a few
extraor dinary individuals who dedicate their lives to

--- PAGE 177 ---
improving those of others. One of my all-time favorites is
Darius, the young cofounder of New Scholars, a nonpr oﬁt
dedicated to cr eating “a P eace Corps for entr epreneurs.”
Early one mor ning in Nair obi, K enya, Darius was on his
way to meet the dir ector of A frica’s lar gest entr epreneurial
network. This was a critical moment for him, his one chance
of cementing a partnership between his young or ganization
and an industry behemoth. Darius decided that this would
be the perfect place to put the mir roring technique to the
test:
When we ar rived, we wer e greeted by Geor ge, one
of the or ganization’s e xecutives. He invited us to the
boardroom, wher e we made small talk over tea. I
paid close attention to Geor ge while we wer e
talking. He was sitting away fr om the table, legs
crossed, and leaning forwar d. Gradually, I moved
into a similar position. This had a noticeable eﬀect:
Geor ge started getting mor e excited, speaking
faster, and getting r eally engaged in the
conversation. So I matched his e xcitement and
pace. This felt natural and easy .
The or ganization’s dir ector, Nathan, ar rived
shortly ther eafter. The minute he walk ed in, I felt the
energy in the r oom change. It became less r elaxed,
more tense. Nathan sat farther away fr om the table,
leaned far back in his chair, and cr ossed his legs in a
diﬀer ent way fr om Geor ge. So I gradually matched
his postur e, moving farther fr om the table, leaning
farther back, and r ecrossing my legs.
Noticing that Nathan’s tone was slow and
deliberate, I matched my tone accor ding to his. As
he waved his hands occasionally to emphasize a
point, I r esponded in kind. A t one point, he tur ned
sideways and leaned an ar m on the table.

--- PAGE 178 ---
When it was my tur n to speak, I inched close
enough to place my ar m on the table and tur ned
sideways, too . Though I knew I was copying his
moves, it still felt natural, and Nathan was obviously
completely unawar e of what I was doing. As I did
this, I could feel the atmospher e getting mor e
comfortable and mor e relaxed.
Finally, as our conversation came to a head, I
asked Nathan how he saw this partnership coming
together . He sat up, tur ned to face the table, and
ﬁrmly tapped it with each point he made. My heart
sank—what he had just announced was very
diﬀer ent fr om what we had been hoping for . But I let
him ﬁnish without inter ruption; and when it was my
turn to speak, I sat up, faced the table, and said,
“Here’s how we see it.” W ith each point, I ﬁr mly
tapped the table just as he had.
I was shock ed by what happened ne xt. Nathan sat
up, look ed ar ound the r oom, and agr eed to every
single one of our requests, even those we didn’t
think we had any hope of obtaining! I couldn’t
believe it. I still can’t believe it. I don’t know if it was
entirely due to the mir roring, but I can tell you that
I’ve never had a meeting start the way this one did
and yet end the way this one did. W e got everything
we wanted, without giving up anything. This is the
most important deal we’ve had to date.
As Darius’s story shows, mir roring someone’s body
language is of ten enough to achieve rapport and sometimes
enough to bring them ar ound to your point of view . Mirroring
is also one of the few techniques that can help over come a
bad ﬁrst impr ession. It’s e xtraor dinarily eﬀective. In fact, I
can tell you that although I teach this material, the
techniques still work on me even when I r ealize people ar e
using them!

--- PAGE 179 ---
But what about cases in which the other person is
exhibiting negative body language? Do you still mir ror then?
Well, it depends. In some situations, you want to ﬁrst mir ror
their body language, then gradually lead it in a mor e
positive dir ection.
Let’s say that one of your colleagues comes in to see you,
clearly upset about something. She timidly taps on your
open door to ask per mission to enter . As she walks in, her
steps ar e hesitant. As you invite her to tell you what’s going
on, she seems anxious and drawn into herself, having
trouble even ﬁnding wor ds to e xpress her concer ns.
This is wher e mir roring could be useful in establishing
rapport. What you could do in this situation is car efully
observe her postur e—the way she’s sitting, how she’s
holding her head, what her shoulders ar e like—and
gradually move into the same position. L ook for r hythms. Is
she nodding her head periodically? T apping her knee?
Fidgeting with a button? Y ou can ﬁnd a way to loosely mir ror
that, too . And, of course, match your voice to hers: adopt a
similar cadence, tempo, and volume.
Once you’r e in a mir rored position, spend your entir e
listening time in that mode: as long as you’r e listening,
match your body language to hers. Only when it’s your tur n
to speak should you start infusing the interaction with
warmth, caring, and compassion thr ough your voice, face,
and eyes. As you speak, gradually shif t into a mor e relaxed,
calm, and, eventually, conﬁdent postur e. Ther e’s a good
chance that she’ll follow .
Mirror-then-lead is a smart strategy when the person
you’r e interacting with needs r eassurance—when they’r e
feeling nervous or timid, anxious or awkwar d, stiﬀ or
withdrawn. W ith any of these emotional states, mir ror them
to establish comfort and rapport, and then gradually draw
them out. In these situations, it’s not a good idea to try to
inﬂuence their body language too for cefully .

--- PAGE 180 ---
On the other hand, ther e are instances wher e you do not
want to mir ror a person’s body language. If their demeanor
is angry or defensive, mir roring would only escalate the
tension. Say you’r e meeting with a manager who has denied
a request you made, and who is sitting in a defensive
position—leaning back with his ar ms and legs cr ossed and
his hands balled into ﬁsts. R ather than mir roring, try
breaking him out of his postur e by handing him something:
a piece of paper or a pen—whatever works. And then, as
soon as he’s in a new position, distract him by giving him
new infor mation or changing the subject while you mir ror
his postur e to r eestablish rapport.
Remember, our physiology aﬀects our psychology . This
link between physiology and psychology is also the r eason
it’s so important to get someone who is in an angry,
stubbor n, or defensive postur e to change their body
language befor e you attempt to change their mind. As long
as their body  is in a certain emotional mode, it will be nearly
impossible to get their mind to feel something diﬀer ent.
Personal Space
Behavioral scientists can pr edict which stall people will
choose in a communal bathr oom with startling accuracy .
People consistently follow a speciﬁc patter n, depending on
which stalls ar e already occupied. Our adher ence to
personal space rules is so str ong, it’s even been found that
people who play virtual-r eality games obey r eal-life personal
space rules within the game.
The concept of personal space evolved fr om mid-
twentieth-century studies of zoo animals’ behavior .7 In the
same manner that animals deﬁne and defend their
territories, we humans feel “ ownership” of the space ar ound
us. This ter ritory, even if it’s just a few inches, is felt as an

--- PAGE 181 ---
extension of our bodies, and we act to pr eserve this space
and r eact str ongly if it is invaded.
Being charismatic means making others feel comfortable,
at ease, and good about themselves when they ar e around
us. In nonverbal communication, one crucial element for
making people feel at ease and establishing rapport is
respecting the amount of personal space people need to be
comfortable. Conversely, not r especting people’s personal-
space pr eferences can cr eate high levels of discomfort, and
those emotions could become associated with you. It’s
worth paying attention.
Let’s say you’r e in a conversation, and you notice your
conversation partner leaning away with her upper body,
pulling her head backwar d, or even physically stepping
away fr om you. This may be a sign that she needs mor e
personal space. The worst thing to do would be to move in
closer . That would heighten her discomfort, and ther e’s a
good chance that those feelings would get associated with
you. Instead, give her space: lean away or move back a few
inches.
The size of personal space varies by cultur e, by population
density, and by situation. A single individual’s comfort zone
is in fact highly variable. W e will accept personal space
restrictions in certain situations, such as when we’r e in a
crowded elevator, bus, or subway .
I realized just how ingrained our sense of personal space
is by trying to over rule my own instincts while standing in a
crowded subway car . When the doors opened and people
poured out, cr eating pock ets of empty space, I r esisted the
urge to move away fr om my near est neighbor . Instead, I
made myself stay in the same spot and the same position,
as close as we’d been when the cr owd pushed us together . I
had been wondering whether my knowledge of our
instinctive tendencies would fr ee me fr om their hold.
Clearly, this was not the case: I r ealized, to my amusement,
that I was feeling physically uncomfortable, almost

--- PAGE 182 ---
unbearably so! And despite my best eﬀorts to stay in place,
I discover ed too late that my body had gotten away fr om
me: though I hadn’t moved my feet, the r est of my body
was leaning away as much as balance and gravity allowed.
Personal space aﬀects our interactions with others and
how we per ceive situations. F or example, that’s why
negotiators choose their seats ar ound a table so car efully;
they know their seating choice can inﬂuence the outcome of
the entir e negotiation. When people ar e sitting acr oss fr om
each other with a table dividing them, they tend to speak in
shorter sentences, ar e mor e likely to ar gue, and can r ecall
less of what was said. 8
Putting It into Practice:  
Charismatic Seating Choices
The ne xt time you want to establish war m rapport with
someone, avoid a confr ontational seating ar rangement
and instead sit either ne xt to or at a 90-degr ee angle
from them. These ar e the positions in which we feel
most comfortable. In fact, this is an e xercise you can try
out with a partner .
♦ Start a conversation sitting ne xt to each other .
♦ After ﬁve minutes, change positions so that you’r e
sitting acr oss fr om each other . You’ll lik ely feel a clear
diﬀer ence in comfort level.
♦ After another ﬁve minutes, move to a 90-degr ee
angle and feel the diﬀer ence.
♦ Finally, come back to your original position sitting
next to each other .

--- PAGE 183 ---
Pay close attention to the rise and fall of feelings of trust
and comfort thr oughout the e xercise.
If you want someone to feel comfortable, avoid seating
them with their back to an open space, particularly if others
are moving behind them. This kind of seating position
causes the br eathing rate, heart rate, and blood pr essur e to
increase rapidly, especially if the person’s back is towar d an
open door or a window at gr ound level. 9 And by association,
their discomfort would lik ely aﬀect their per ception of you.
Your Eyes, the Windows to Y our Soul
Have you ever been in a conversation with someone who
kept looking over your shoulder to see if someone mor e
important and inter esting than you might be ar riving? Those
roaming eyes ar e deﬁnitely not charismatic.
Good eye contact is incr edibly important. P rofound eye
contact can have a powerful impact on people; it can
communicate empathy and give an impr ession of
thoughtfulness, wisdom, and intelligence. Y ou simply cannot
be charismatic without it. In fact, eye contact is one of the
main ways charismatic masters mak e you feel that you ar e
the most important person in the r oom.
Anthr opologist Helen F isher e xplains that when you star e
with intensity at someone, it can speed up their heart rate
and send a hor mone called phenylethylamine,  or PEA,
coursing thr ough their bloodstr eam. PEA is the same
hormone that pr oduces the phenomenon we call love at ﬁrst
sight.
In one study, complete strangers wer e ask ed to count the
number of times the person acr oss fr om them blink ed. This
was just a ploy to get people to look deeply into each
other’s eyes without feeling the awkwar dness that usually
arises. W ithin just a few minutes, people r eported incr eased

--- PAGE 184 ---
aﬀection, and some even passionate feelings, for each
other .10 So obviously, you don’t want to over do it, but it can
be very eﬀective.
Our eyes ar e a k ey part of our nonverbal communication,
perhaps the single most important one. Why ar e eyes called
the “ windows to the soul”? Because they ar e the most
mobile part of the entir e face—and so, the most e xpressive.
Imagine that you’r e in a conversation with someone who’s
wearing sunglasses. W ouldn’t you ﬁnd it har der to r ead
them? This is why pok er players wear sunglasses, as did
shipping magnate Aristotle Onassis during tough
negotiations so that his adversaries wouldn’t know what he
was thinking.
Eye contact is so meaningful to us that our brains ar e
hardwired to e xperience separation distr ess whenever
someone with whom we have signiﬁcant eye contact tur ns
away . One good way to avoid cr eating this anxiety is to k eep
eye contact for thr ee full seconds at the end of your
interaction with someone. This may sound short, but it’ll
actually feel endless! If you can get into the habit of doing
this, you’ll ﬁnd it well worth the eﬀort. W ith just a few
seconds’ investment, people will feel you have truly paid
attention to them.
Two of the most common eye-contact issues people have
are lack of eye contact due to shyness and lack of eye
contact due to distraction. Either, unfortunately, can ruin
your charisma potential. One technique works equally well
for both of these: delving into sensations. As you look into
someone’s eyes, pay attention to the physical sensations
you ar e feeling in that very moment. If shyness is the issue,
this helps to dedramatize the discomfort. If distraction is the
issue, this technique will help you k eep your mind focused in
the pr esent moment. Y ou can also look at the diﬀer ent
colors you see in their eyes, the diﬀer ent shades playing
around their pupils.

--- PAGE 185 ---
Let’s say you’r e at a party . Your boss’s spouse grabs your
arm and pr oceeds to talk your ear oﬀ about an impossibly
boring subject. Y ou might be tempted to let your mind
wander or your eyes r oam. But you know that doing either
of these would be visible and would diminish your charisma.
This is wher e the pr esence techniques can help k eep you
focused.
These insights and tools will help you get the right amount
of eye contact. But that’s not enough—to be charismatic,
you also need to know how to use the right kind of eye
contact. The degr ee and the pr ecise kind of tension that
shows ar ound our eyes dramatically impact how we ar e
perceived.
Les Fehmi, a neur oscientist specializing in this ﬁeld, found
that it all comes down to the way we pay attention. If we’r e
in nar row, focused, evaluative attention—imagine viewing
the world thr ough the eyes of a police oﬃcer—our str ess
system will be on constant, low-grade alert. This brings our
eyes into sharp focus, incr eases our str ess responses, and
results in both our face and our eyes tensing. 11 It greatly
inhibits the amount of war mth we can pr oject.
Charismatic eye contact means switching to a sof ter
focus. This immediately r elaxes our eyes and face, and
quiets down our str ess system. Her e are three simple steps
to help you switch to a sof t, open focus: F irst, close your
eyes. F ocus on the space ar ound you, the empty space in
the room. Now focus on the space ﬁlling the entir e universe.
That’s it—you’ve moved into “sof t focus.”
Putting It into Practice: Charismatic Eyes
To truly understand how diﬀer ent your face appears
when your eyes ar e relaxed and open, go see the
transfor mation for yourself .

--- PAGE 186 ---
♦ Find a r oom with a mir ror wher e you won’t be
disturbed for a few minutes.
♦ Close your eyes and think of a r ecent annoyance—
some minor issue that’s been bugging you lately, or
an unpleasant task such as doing your tax es.
♦ When you feel the ir ritation tak e hold, open your eyes
and look closely in the mir ror. Note the tension ar ound
your eyes, their nar rowness.
♦ Now close your eyes and think of something that
would induce war m feelings—a r ecent pleasant
experience, lik e time spent with a good friend.
♦ When the war mth has arisen, open your eyes and
look at that pr ecise kind of r elaxation. That’s what
warmth looks lik e.
♦ Close your eyes once mor e and think of an e xciting
time when you felt full of conﬁdence and on top of the
world—r eceiving a triumph, an awar d, some brilliant
news.
♦ When you’ve accessed the feeling of conﬁdence,
open your eyes again and note closely what they look
like now . That’s what conﬁdence looks lik e.
One of my clients mentioned that as he tried this e xercise,
he saw “how little eﬀort it tak es to mak e drastic changes in
our eyes… literally, one-millimeter changes have a huge
impact!”
You knew that eye contact matter ed, and you wer e right.
Few things impair charisma mor e than bad eye contact and
few things gain you charisma points mor e than impr oving
your eye contact. The ne xt time you’r e in a conversation, try

--- PAGE 187 ---
to regularly check whether your eyes ar e feeling tense. If
you feel the slightest bit of tension ar ound your eyes, aim to
relax them. Y ou can use any favorite quick visualization (just
one heartwar ming image can do the trick) or aim to move
into sof t focus.
Getting your eyes right is critical to emanating war mth.
Now let’s look at one element critical for power : postur e.
The Right Posture for Nonverbal Power
Because we can’t peer into people’s hearts and minds, we
assume attributes fr om the clues we observe. When
someone displays high conﬁdence thr ough their body
language, we tend to assume they have something to be
conﬁdent about: people simply accept what you pr oject. Any
increase in the amount of conﬁdence your body language
projects will bring you major charisma r ewar ds.
Projecting power and conﬁdence is what allows you to
emanate war mth, enthusiasm, and e xcitement without
coming acr oss as over eager or subservient. Because body
language is wir ed so deeply within us, signs of conﬁdence
(or lack ther eof) in someone’s body language have veto
power over all other signs of power . No matter how many
signs of power and high status we may pr oject thr ough our
appearance, title, or even thr ough others’ defer ence, a body
language of insecurity will kill charisma on the spot. On the
other hand, a body language of conﬁdence can endow its
bearer with charisma even when no other power signs ar e
present.
In the following sections, you’ll lear n how to br oadcast
power in your postur e and poise in a way that’s pr operly
balanced with war mth.
Be the Big Gorilla

--- PAGE 188 ---
It’s a sweet spring day in Califor nia, and students ar e milling
about the sunny campus of Stanfor d University . With its
pastel Spanish-style buildings, palm tr ees, and pr ofusion of
wildﬂowers, the university feels lik e a cr oss between a posh
country club and a Spanish hacienda.
Nervously making her way acr oss campus, peering
through thick glasses, Ella is a fragile-looking history major,
her ar ms full of books, on her way to her very ﬁrst class of
Kickbo xing 101.
As she enters the lock er room, Ella has no idea what to
expect. She changes into shorts and a T -shirt, suddenly
feeling very br eakable. Maybe we’ll start with push-ups,  she
tells herself . Or maybe punching sandbags? Oh, I hope we’r e
not ask ed to ﬁght right away in fr ont of everyone. I’ve never
thrown a punch in my life.
To her r elief, the class begins with neither punches nor
push-ups. Instead, the coach announces a far mor e
surprising assignment: “ Go back out and ﬁnd a busy,
crowded space on campus right now . For the ne xt hour, as
you walk ar ound, try to get other people to move aside for
you.” The only rule is that Ella isn’t allowed to step aside to
make way for others. If it means a mild collision, so be it.
So her e’s Ella, bracing herself to move thr ough the
crowded main quad. All she knows is that she somehow
must mak e others move out of the way for her . What would
you have done? Imagine being ther e with that mission—how
would you get others to move aside for you?
When we think of bo xing matches and what helps an
opponent win or lose in the ring, most of us think of
strength, speed, and agility . And these ar e all true. But as
many pr ofessional bo xers will tell you, a lot happens befor e
the opponents even set foot in the ar ena, well befor e the
ﬁrst punch is thr own. The way the ﬁghters car ry themselves
—how impr essive and intimidating they seem—can play a
decisive r ole in the ﬁght.

--- PAGE 189 ---
Though you may not r ealize it, your subconscious mind is
constantly scanning your sur roundings as you move thr ough
your envir onment to glean the infor mation you need to k eep
moving forwar d. Your eyes scan and assess potential
obstacles, including other people in your way . To deter mine
whether you need to modif y your r oute to avoid them, you
read their body language without even r ealizing it.
If they’r e broadcasting a body language that says, “Y ou
better move aside, baby,” you will most lik ely pick up on it
and mak e way for them. Conversely, if you feel that you’r e
the bigger gorilla, you’ll stay your course and e xpect them
to deviate.
Right now, close your eyes and imagine a very lar ge
gorilla. A rival has just br eached his ter ritory, and the gorilla
is furious. He goes char ging thr ough the jungle, r eaches the
top branch of the top tr ee, and fr om ther e wants to
broadcast his pr esence all ar ound and intimidate the rival
oﬀ his ter ritory . What would he do? He’d lik ely inﬂate his
chest and pound it with his ﬁsts—both of these actions have
the eﬀect of making him look bigger . The pounding also
makes him loud and scary . That’s how a gorilla char ging
through the jungle wants to look: big, loud, and scary . In
human ter ms, we r ead conﬁdence the same way : how much
space people ar e willing to tak e up.
Deborah Gruenfeld, or ganizational behavior pr ofessor at
Stanfor d’s business school, says that “ Powerful people sit
sideways on chairs, drape their ar ms over the back, or
appropriate two chairs by placing an ar m acr oss the back of
an adjacent chair . They put their feet on the desk. They sit
on the desk.” All of these behaviors, she says, ar e ways of
claiming space.
The ne xt time you’r e out in a cr owded envir onment,
practice getting people to move aside for you. Y ou could
even do this on your way to work. F irst, visualize what a big
gorilla would look lik e char ging down the str eet. Then adopt
the cor responding body language: imagine you’r e a big

--- PAGE 190 ---
gorilla about to go char ging down the str eet and let your
body e xpress that. T ake up as much space as you can.
Inﬂate your chest and char ge thr ough the cr owd. Y ou might
even swing your ar ms as you go, taking up yet mor e space.
When you ﬁrst start trying out this conﬁdent body
language, it can feel a little scary . But it’s well worth it.
What’s the worst that can happen? Y ou bump into someone.
Use that as an opportunity to practice switching into
kindness charisma with a quick visualization to incr ease
your war mth. Imagine the person you’ve just bumped into is
a good friend or see them with angel wings.
Your job is to lear n how to tak e up space and get
comfortable doing so . Keep in mind that you’ll need the
freedom of motion to inﬂate your chest, so avoid
constrictive clothing that doesn’t allow you to br eathe. Y ou
can’t be imposing without o xygen.
One of the ﬁrst things I question my clients about when
we work on pr ojecting charismatic body language is:
“What’s your br eathing lik e right now?” Anytime your
breathing is shallow, you activate the str ess response. It’s
hard to feel calm, r elaxed, and conﬁdent when you’r e not
getting enough o xygen and your body thinks it’s in ﬁght- or-
ﬂight mode.
Putting It into Practice: Being the Big Gorilla
This is a gr eat e xercise to use befor e any meeting or
interaction wher e you want to both feel and br oadcast
conﬁdence—for instance, befor e a job interview, or
befor e meeting someone who’s a bit intimidating.
Follow these seven steps to convey conﬁdent body
language:
1. Make sur e you can br eathe. L oosen any clothing if
need be.

--- PAGE 191 ---
2. Stand up and shak e up your body .
3. Take a wide stance and plant your feet ﬁr mly on the
ground. A wide, stable stance helps you both feel
and pr oject mor e conﬁdence.
4. Stretch your ar ms to the ceiling, trying to touch it
with your ﬁngertips.
5. Now str etch your ar ms to the walls on either side of
you, trying to touch them.
6. Bring your ar ms loosely to your sides, and r oll your
shoulders up and then back.
7. INFLATE. Try to tak e up as much space as possible.
Imagine puﬃng up lik e a gorilla, doubling in size.
As Stanfor d’s Gruenfeld found, people who assume
expansive poses (taking up mor e space) e xperience a
measurable physiological shif t. In one e xperiment,
assertiveness- and ener gy-promoting hor mones r ose by
19 per cent, while anxiety hor mones fell by 25 per cent.
Assuming a str ong, conﬁdent physical postur e will mak e
you feel mor e conﬁdent and mor e powerful. As you feel
more powerful, your body language adapts accor dingly .
This in tur n gives you yet another biochemical boost,
and the cycle builds upon itself . All you have to do is get
the cycle going, and if you k eep practicing, conﬁdent
body language will become second natur e.
Regal Posture
Can you imagine James Bond ﬁdgeting? How about tugging
at his clothing, bobbing his head, or twitching his shoulders?
How about hemming and hawing befor e he speaks? Of

--- PAGE 192 ---
course not. Bond is the quintessential cool, calm, and
collected character . He epitomizes conﬁdence.
This kind of high-status, high-conﬁdence body language is
characterized by how few movements ar e made. Composed
people e xhibit a level of stillness, which is sometimes
described as poise . They avoid e xtraneous, superﬂuous
gestur es such as ﬁdgeting with their clothes, their hair, or
their faces, incessantly nodding their heads, or saying “um”
befor e sentences.
These gestur es, which behavior e xperts identif y as low-
status, ar e often signs used by someone wanting to convey
reassurance to the person they’r e interacting with. The
desir e to convey r eassurance can stem fr om two diﬀer ent
sources:
Empathy : wanting to ensur e that the other person feels
heard and understood and knows you’r e paying
attention
Insecurity : wanting to please or appease the person
you’r e interacting with
In contrast, people who come acr oss as powerful,
conﬁdent, or high-status ar e usually mor e contained; they
don’t feel the ur ge to give so much r eassurance because
they’r e not as wor ried about what their counterpart is
thinking.
Imagine yourself in a r oyal court. P icture a nervous
servant anxiously bobbing and curtseying. Now imagine the
opposite: the king or queen. P oised and powerful, they don’t
need to mak e a move.
When you want to incr ease your poise, ther e are three
major issues to look out for . The ﬁrst is e xcessive or rapid
nodding. Nodding once for emphasis or to e xpress
agreement is ﬁne and can be an eﬀective communication
method, but nodding thr ee or four times in rapid succession

--- PAGE 193 ---
is not. This is what one of my clients has come to call “the
bobble head.”
The second hindrance is e xcessive verbal r eassurance:
making a sound, such as “uh-huh,” or a half -sentence, such
as “Oh, I agr ee.” Done once, and consciously, this is ﬁne;
multiple times per sentence is not.
The thir d issue is r estlessness or ﬁdgeting (tapping your
pencil or foot, or r earranging items on the table). F idgeting
decreases pr esence, thus charisma. Even when you have
warmth, conﬁdence, and ar e mentally pr esent, if you ar e
physically r estless, you can’t be charismatic. Y our body
language is sending distracting signals. I know one
particular young entr epreneur who is both conﬁdent and
warm, yet his r estless tics and incessant ﬁdgeting mak e him
seem odd and eccentric. He comes acr oss as a child who
can’t k eep still and has a har d time being tak en seriously .
How to br eak these habits? The ﬁrst step is awar eness—
you need to see how you appear to others. One of the most
valuable things you can do is to videotape yourself during a
meeting or even a casual conversation. When you sit down
to watch it, fast-forwar d ten minutes; you’ll pr obably have
forgotten about the camera enough to display uninhibited
body language. T urn the sound oﬀ at ﬁrst and just compar e
your body language (nodding, gesturing, etc.) to whomever
is the most senior person in the r oom. Then watch again
with the sound on and compar e your verbal r eassurance
level with others’. Though the e xperience can be painful, it’s
often invaluable: r ealize that everything you see on that
tape is what others ar e seeing. Y ou might as well be awar e
of it, too .
With this newfound awar eness, you may catch yourself
throughout the day displaying high amounts of verbal and
nonverbal r eassurance and feel dismayed by how of ten it
occurs. This is nor mal. Many of my clients tell me they feel
incredibly frustrated for the ﬁrst few days, noticing how
often and how eagerly they bob their head.

--- PAGE 194 ---
Give yourself a br eak. Everyone goes thr ough this period
of frustration, and it r eally is possible to br eak these habits.
The client who called her nodding bobble-heading pr oudly
reported: “I still nod my head occasionally, but I now do it
deliberately, in well-chosen moments.”
Catch yourself when you ﬁnd yourself nodding or
verbally r eassuring, and try to r eplace it with stillness
and silence. Aim to get comfortable with silence,
inserting pauses between your sentences or even
midsentence. If you want to speed up the pr ocess, ask a
friend or colleague to tell you whenever they catch you
nodding or r eassuring. One very eﬀective trick is to
carry around a stack of one-dollar bills and commit to
ripping one up every time you trip. F or maximum
eﬀectiveness, ask a friend, spouse, or colleague to help
catch whichever habit you want to br eak.
Be awar e, however, that br oadcasting too much power
can come acr oss as either ar rogant or intimidating for some
people. The war mth-enhancing techniques you gained
earlier in this chapter, such as k eeping your eyes in sof t
focus, will counter this. Y ou can also aim to bring your chin
down a few degr ees—imagine a king bowing his head to a
noble emissary . This has a double beneﬁt. It avoids giving
the impr ession that you’r e contemptuously looking down
your nose at someone (the impr ession given when your
head is tilted back) and simultaneously mak es you appear
more thoughtful, attentive, and deliberate as your eyes
automatically open wider .
Knowing What to Do When

--- PAGE 195 ---
The same amount of nonverbal communication or
reassurance can be appr opriate and helpful in one conte xt
but hold you back in another . For instance, if you’r e seeking
to mak e a shy colleague or subor dinate feel comfortable
and open up, you would be smart to punctuate your
interaction with both nonverbal (nodding) and verbal (uh-
huh) r eassurance.
If they’r e looking insecur e and you think they need to be
reassur ed, ramp up the amount of war mth you’r e projecting.
Use any of the war mth-enhancing visualizations you gained
in Chapter 5  or the verbal war mth techniques fr om Chapter
8, and adapt your body language to theirs.
On the other hand, when you’d lik e to be seen as a
conﬁdent peer or a r espected boss, focus on poise and
containment and limit your r eassurance. R ather than
synchr onizing your body language with theirs (unless theirs
is the very essence of conﬁdence you want to display), k eep
to your own r hythms and maintain your conﬁdent, contained
postur e.
You now have the basics of pr ojecting pr esence, power,
and war mth thr ough both verbal and nonverbal
communication.
You ﬁrst lear ned how to build a solid inter nal foundation
for charisma, then how to bring your charisma into the
world. Now you’r e ready to lear n how to apply these tools in
diﬃcult situations. The ne xt chapter will help you stay
charismatic when it counts the most.
KEY T AKEA WAYS
 While our wor ds speak to a person’s logical mind, our
nonverbal communication speaks to a person’s emotional
mind.
 Nonverbal communication ampliﬁes verbal communication
when the two ar e congruent.

--- PAGE 196 ---
 When verbal and nonverbal messages contradict, we tend
to trust what we see in the other person’s body language
more than what we hear them say .
 Through emotional contagion, your emotions can spr ead
to other people. As a leader, the emotions conveyed by
your body language, even during brief, casual encounters,
can have a ripple eﬀect on your team or even your entir e
company .
 To communicate war mth, aim to mak e people feel
comfortable: r espect their personal space, mir ror their
body language, and k eep your eyes r elaxed.
 When people come to you in need of r eassurance, ﬁrst
mirror their body language, then lead them to mor e calm,
open, and conﬁdent positions.
 When people ar e defensive, br eak their body language
lock by handing them something to look at or something
they will have to lean forwar d to tak e.
 To project power, tak e up space (be the big gorilla) and be
still (adopt a r egal postur e).
 Cut out verbal and nonverbal r eassurances lik e head
bobbing and e xcessive uh-huh-ing.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 197 ---
1 0
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 198 ---
Diﬃcult Situations
FOR THE MOST  part, my clients r eport major success
incorporating the charisma-boosting techniques you’ve just
learned into their everyday social and business interactions.
But, as you may well imagine, certain challenging
circumstances may r equir e a mor e nuanced appr oach. In
this chapter you’ll lear n how to handle situations such as
dealing with diﬃcult people, delivering bad news or
criticism, and giving apologies in the most charismatic way
you can. It is actually possible to come out of each of these
experiences with r elationships intact, and possibly even
strengthened.
Dealing with Diﬃcult People
Some people ar e just diﬃcult. Some have egos that need to
be str oked, some ar e always critical, others ar e deliberately
confr ontational. In many cases, these people mak e a point
of being r esistant to being won over . This section gives you
techniques for disar ming diﬃcult people and getting them
on your side.
Peter was the worldwide chair man of a global pr ofessional
services ﬁr m. When he came to see me, he alr eady had a
level of charisma most e xecutives would envy . But P eter had
a diﬀer ent challenge: he wanted to tak e the entir e global
ﬁrm in a new dir ection.
“It’s lik e her ding cats,” he grumbled as we sat down that
morning. F or his initiative to succeed, all eight members of
the ﬁr m’s inter national boar d would have to agr ee to it, and
each of them, he told me, was “ one big ego with a couple of
arms and legs sticking out.” He had only one chance to

--- PAGE 199 ---
succeed: an imminent inter national boar d meeting. F ailure
was not an option, so P eter clear ed his schedule and ﬂew to
New Y ork to meet with me.
What magical charisma tricks might I have, he ask ed, to
win over that entir e boar d?
Divide and Conquer
My ﬁrst r ecommendation to P eter was simple: don’t try to
win them all over all at once.
Every time someone sees you, their per ception of you is
ﬁltered thr ough the conte xt in which you both operate: their
internal state and their personal and cultural ﬁlters. It’s far
more diﬃcult to have charisma when you’r e dealing with a
group because you must handle all the individual conte xts
on top of the gr oup dynamic. The one e xception is when
you’r e on stage: the eﬀect of being in the spotlight mak es
up for the multiple-conte xt handicap. But in general, when
you have a gr oup of diﬃcult people to convince, you’ll have
much gr eater chances of success if you work on each of
them individually .
This is why P eter and I craf ted an individual persuasion
strategy for the CEO of each country, and he had a separate
meeting with each of them. This allowed him to choose the
right charisma style for each person and situation. As we
saw in Chapter 6 , the “ right” charisma style depends on
your personality, the situation, your goals, and the person
you’r e dealing with.
One situation might call for focus charisma. P erhaps
you’r e dealing with a person who needs to feel hear d and
listened to . In P eter’s case, the head of the ﬁr m’s Spanish
branch was feeling ill-tr eated. He thought that his opinions
hadn’t been given due consideration by the r est of the
board. He also disappr oved of P eter’s r ecent “Message fr om
the Chair man” ﬁrm-wide e-mail and wanted to mak e this

--- PAGE 200 ---
known. “ He really just wanted to get this all oﬀ his chest,”
Peter told me. “ Focus charisma was perfect. It made him
feel completely hear d, listened to, and understood. A fter
that, he was far mor e willing to consider anything I
suggested.”
Other situations might call for either authority or visionary
charisma; for instance, when people ar e dealing with
uncertainty and looking for a clear, compelling vision. In
Peter’s case, the head of Ar gentina was dealing with
massive uncertainty . His country was facing a sever e
economic and social crisis. P eter told me that “they had run
out of answers.” Her e, he dr ew mainly on visionary
charisma, pr esenting a strategic plan that would give the
senior e xecutive team a solid framework to r ely on as well
as clear guidelines to follow .
Once you know whom it is you need to persuade and
which styles might work best for each person, consider the
following r ecommendations to help win them over .
Make Them Rationalize in Y our F avor
Benjamin F ranklin’s favorite way to win over his political
opponents was not to do them favors but rather to ask them
for favors. F ranklin once wr ote a note to one of his
adversaries e xpressing his hope of r eading a certain rar e
book he’d hear d that this gentleman possessed, and asking
the favor of bor rowing it for just a few days. The gentleman
complied. F ranklin r eturned it as pr omised, with a second
note war mly e xpressing his appr eciation and gratitude for
the favor .
In his autobiography, F ranklin describes what happened as
a result: “When we ne xt met in the House, he spok e to me
(which he had never done befor e), and with gr eat civility;
and he ever af ter manifested a r eadiness to serve me on all

--- PAGE 201 ---
occasions, so that we became gr eat friends, and our
friendship continued to his death.” 1
This technique has become known as the Ben F ranklin
Eﬀect . Having lent F ranklin the book, the opponent had to
either consider himself as inconsistent (having done a favor
for someone he dislik ed) or rationalize his action by deciding
that he actually rather lik ed Franklin. “I did something nice
for this person, so I must lik e him. I wouldn’t have agr eed to
do a favor for someone I dislik e. That wouldn’t mak e sense.”
Using this technique encouraged the opponent to rationalize
his actions in F ranklin’s favor .
How can you use this technique to your advantage? Y ou
could indeed ask your opponents for their help or ask them
for a favor . Better still, ask them for something they can
give without incur ring any cost: their opinion . Asking for
someone’s opinion is a better strategy than asking for their
advice, because giving advice feels lik e mor e eﬀort, as they
have to tailor a r ecommendation to your situation, wher eas
with an opinion, they can just spout whatever is on their
mind.
Best of all is to call upon the beneﬁts of rationalization
through something they’ve alr eady done for you. F ind ways
to remind them of any help they’ve given you in the past.
Express your appr eciation and gratitude, highlight the
choice they made, the eﬀort they put in; and if they put
their r eputation on the line for you in any way, play it up.
Remember, it’ll mak e them rationalize their actions in your
favor . “Wow, I r eally did go all- out for this person. I must
really lik e them.”
Expressing Appreciation
Way back in 1936, Dale Car negie wr ote the now-classic
book How to W in Friends and Inﬂuence P eople.  Though his
original guidelines have since become clichés, some

--- PAGE 202 ---
fundamental principles still hold; and in the case of praise,
Carnegie’s writings ar e just as applicable today . He writes:
“We all crave honest appr eciation. It’s a gnawing and
unfaltering human hunger; and the rar e individual who
satisﬁes it will hold people in the palm of his hand.”
This simple r ecommendation is supported by r ecent
science. P eople ar e indeed incr edibly susceptible to praise.
In fact, K eise Izuma’s r esear ch showed that hearing a
computer  tell people “ Good job!” lit up the same r ewar d
regions of their brains as a ﬁnancial windfall. 2
The most eﬀective and cr edible compliments ar e those
that ar e both personal and speciﬁc. F or instance, instead of
“Great job,” you could say, “ You did a gr eat job,” or, better
yet, “The way you k ept your calm when that client became
obno xious was impr essive.” The mor e appr eciation you
express and the mor e you show them the impact they’ve
had on you, the mor e they will lik e you and feel invested in
your success. They’ll rationalize in your favor . When you
show people how they’ve impacted you, they feel that
they’ve in a sense made  you. This sense of ownership gives
them a vested inter est, and they identif y with you; you
become part of their identity . Ther efore, they feel mor e
responsibility for ensuring your success.
Making people rationalize in your favor is a classic
mark eting technique of ten employed by commer cial
airlines. As they welcome us to our ar rival city, the pilot or
ﬂight attendants now of ten say : “We know you have many
airlines to choose fr om, and we thank you for choosing to ﬂy
with us.” Hearing their appr eciation r eminds us that we had
a choice, and that we chose them . What’s the r esult? W e
will tend to view the airline with gr eater favor because, af ter
all, we chose it, and we hate to be wr ong. R emember John
Kenneth Galbraith’s quote about our str ong pr eference to
prove ourselves cor rect rather than change our minds. Most
of us would much rather decide we’r e happy with our choice
of airline than ﬁnd fault with our decision.

--- PAGE 203 ---
Reminding people that they had a choice and that they
chose you, your company, your service, or your suggestion
is one of the most useful tools to maintain their support for
you or your idea, particularly when the going gets r ough and
people start complaining.
And r emember, this pr ocess also works in r everse, so
avoid making other people feel wr ong. If someone feels lik e
they’ve done you har m, they will seek to rationalize their
actions and will convince themselves that what they did was
justiﬁed. They don’t want to feel lik e a bad person, ther efore
you must have done something wr ong in or der for them to
act this way towar d you. F ew people will blame themselves
no matter how wr ong they may be—even notorious
gangster Al Capone saw himself as a public benefactor .
You can use rationalization not just for yourself but for the
idea you’r e supporting. By showing someone the impact
they’ve had on a pr oject or an idea, they will feel a degr ee
of ownership of it, and then instinctively will feel driven to
support it. Show them how it changed as a r esult of their
involvement, their actions, or their r ecommendations.
Change is the sign of impact. As soon as we cr eate change,
we have cr eated impact.
Better yet, show the person how this idea or pr oject was,
at its very cor e, in its very sour ce, inspir ed by what they did
in the past—a similar idea, pr oject, or initiative they
supported.
This is what P eter did with the chair man of the ﬁr m’s
French branch. He highlighted all the ways in which the
endeavor was not just similar to but in fact inspir ed by past
initiatives that the F rench contingent had launched.
Don’t Go in Unprotected
As with all to xic substances, to xic people should indeed be
“handled with car e.” Not for their sak e, but for yours.

--- PAGE 204 ---
Dealing with a diﬃcult person, lik e any hostile situation, can
activate your str ess system, sending adr enaline ﬂooding
through your body . And that can be a killer .
Dr. Redfor d Williams, pr ofessor of psychiatry at Duk e
University Medical Center, spent mor e than twenty years
studying the impact of the mind and emotions on health.
“Getting angry is lik e taking a small dose of slow-acting
poison,” he concluded. It leads to higher blood pr essur e and
arterial damage, and it spurs cholester ol-ﬁlled fat cells to
empty into the bloodstr eam. In brief, hostile feelings ar e apt
to har m your health unless you know how to handle them.
To counteract the str ess hor mones that could ﬂood your
system, impair your mental functioning, and generate
negative body language, ﬂood your system with o xytocin
instead. T o do this when dealing with a diﬃcult person, get
into empathy and stay ther e. You can use any of the
compassion-accessing tools you lear ned in Chapter 5 . It
might also help to consider that this person may well be in a
state of utter self -loathing. The inter nal world of diﬃcult
people can be pr etty nasty—that’s the very r eason they’r e
diﬃcult. If their mental climate wer e one of peace and love,
they’d be e xuding war mth instead. Hostility is of ten nothing
but the e xternal manifestation of inter nal tur moil.
If you need a compassion boost, consider an alter nate
reality . Imagine that just a few hours ago they saw a
beloved par ent die. R emember, it’s not for their sak e that
you’r e doing this but for yours. It will r educe the level of
toxicity in your body and mak e the e xperience less
frustrating for you. Y ou can go back to this technique
anytime you feel your frustration level rising.
Getting into empathy will pr otect your mental and
emotional state, and give you the right body language
throughout. If you’r e in an adversarial mindset, this will be
written acr oss your face. Empathy will help you get into a
collaborative mindset instead, giving you a gr eat body
language in addition to making the interaction far easier to

--- PAGE 205 ---
handle. This is why kindness charisma can be a surprisingly
eﬀective tool in dealing with diﬃcult people.
Maria, a young MIT graduate who’d r ecently joined a new
company in Boston, told me she combined several of the
tools to alleviate the r esentment she felt towar d two of her
colleagues. “They’r e good people, but their behavior r eally
got me angry . And because they didn’t apologize, the
resentment just k ept building.” She didn’t feel quite
conﬁdent enough to demand an apology, but couldn’t let
this r esentment simmer either, because she needed to work
well with both of her teammates.
So Maria wr ote a venting letter to get everything oﬀ her
chest, describing in detail how she felt about the situation.
Then she wr ote out their imagined r eturn apologies. “W riting
the letter and r eceiving the apologies felt so liberating! I
had a surprising feeling of satisfaction and could r eally feel
the resentment dissipate.”
The ne xt day, in the hour befor e her team meeting, she
reread the apologies and used the zooming- out technique to
see the whole situation fr om afar, to see how small the
whole thing r eally was. F inally, she visualized a war m
moment of triumph. She also told me that during the
meeting, imagining both of her colleagues with angel wings
really helped. “This was a test for me. And it work ed! I
cannot tell you how diﬀer ent the e xperience and the
outcome wer e. I cannot tell you how good it felt. I know I
both felt and showed war m self -conﬁdence. W ow.”
Let’s go back to P eter. By early September, he had met
with every one of his boar d members. He’d used a slightly
diﬀer ent mode of charisma with each, and he told me:
“Well, they all sound  like they’r e on boar d. But of course, I
might be wr ong—and one never knows what could happen
during the meeting.” P eter lef t nothing to chance. In the
hours leading up to the big boar d meeting, he made sur e his
calendar was as charisma-inducing as possible, using the
tools fr om the “ warming up for k ey moments” section (see

--- PAGE 206 ---
page 93). Just befor e the meeting began, he spent ﬁf teen
minutes getting into the right mental state.
He told me later : “When I walk ed into that r oom, I could
feel the conﬁdence, war mth, and calm radiating fr om me. It
was amazing.” As it tur ned out, the CEOs now felt so
invested in the new dir ection he wanted to tak e the ﬁr m, all
he had to do was sit back and let them  push for it.
Delivering Bad News
It was one of those rar e cases wher e I got to hear both sides
of the story .
One summer af ternoon, Xavier started our coaching
session with a r equest. “Ther e’s a voicemail I got a few
hours ago that’s been r eally bugging me. W ould you mind
listening to it and helping me get into a better mental state
befor e I return the call? It’s fr om Susan.”
This is the message that Susan had lef t: “Xavier, I want to
talk to you about your memo . I have bad news—well, I
shouldn’t say that, but it’s something you may ﬁnd
insulting, and I guarantee I do not intend it that way .
Anyway, call me back.”
Ouch. Can you spot Susan’s mistak es? F irst, she was
creating highly negative associations: her message was
unpleasant fr om beginning to end. Second, she had fallen
into the white-elephant trap by telling Xavier he “shouldn’t”
feel insulted. Because our brain can’t unpr ocess infor mation
it has r eceived, it’s lik ely that the wor d insulted  is what
Xavier’s mind r ecalled most.
Third, by being vague in her message, Susan was letting
Xavier’s mind imagine the worst. W ith a brain wir ed to look
out for the negative, when we hear “It’s bad news,” our
brain automatically starts thinking of the worst possible
scenarios.

--- PAGE 207 ---
Susan was also part of the team I was coaching, so when I
saw her next I e xplained: “ Put yourself in Xavier’s place.
Imagine getting a voicemail announcing bad news and
being insulted, without any e xplanation. Y es, you’ve
certainly grabbed his attention. But what kind of emotions
do you think he’ll associate with you fr om now on? Every
time he thinks about that message he’ll think about bad
news and being insulted. Is that r eally what you want to be
associated with in Xavier’s mind?”
You won’t always be able to choose the time and place for
your diﬃcult conversations. But when you can, by all
means, consider both timing and location. Befor e you pick
up the phone or sit the person down to talk, tak e a moment
to imagine what mental state they might be in.
If you know they’ve just had a very r ough, str essful, or
tiring twenty -four hours and you can wait a day, do so . I’ve
experienced the diﬀer ence between r eceiving tough news
on a day when I was operating well and on a day when I was
sick or tir ed. In the latter case, the news was much har der
to bear—molehills felt lik e mountains.
Befor e delivering bad news, think about the setting,
remembering that people will transfer their feelings for the
envir onment to the e xperience itself . As much as you can,
choose a comfortable location. Don’t try to hold a diﬃcult
conversation in a noisy place such as a train station or an
airport.
Do whatever you can to incr ease their comfort. Y ou can
even use pr ops for this. Have you ever noticed the way that
people ﬁdget with items in their hands or with their clothing
—for instance, toying with their shirt buttons when they’r e
in the middle of a diﬃcult conversation or when they’r e
having tr ouble e xpressing themselves? What they’r e
subconsciously doing is ﬁnding objects on which to focus
their mind to distract themselves fr om the discomfort of
their immediate e xperience. Mak e it easy for them by
having objects close by with which they can play, and thus

--- PAGE 208 ---
more quickly feel at ease, while conversing with you. They
won’t even r ealize what’s happening, and yet they’ll sense
the interaction become easier and mor e comfortable.
I always have Play -Doh on hand for people to play with
when they come see me. It’s particularly helpful with people
who ar e naturally shy or when the conversation is diﬃcult.
It’s fascinating to see thr oughout the interaction the way
they’ll bring their focus back to the Play -Doh in their hands
whenever they’r e feeling a bit awkwar d and need to r elieve
the intensity of their discomfort.
Candles and ﬁr elight have the same positive distracting
eﬀect. This is why they’r e so prized in r omantic situations,
when comfort and ease ar e key. These constantly moving
elements give people the feeling that ther e’s something
happening in the backgr ound that they can tur n their
attention to when they need a distraction. Backgr ound
music, of course, serves partly the same purpose.
When you’r e delivering unpleasant news of any kind, your
body language is everything. R emember the way negative
perfor mance r eviews deliver ed with positive body language
were far better r eceived than positive r eviews deliver ed with
negative body language? In str essful situations, your body
language car ries far gr eater impact than your wor ds. When
the str ess system is activated, a mor e primal part of the
brain tak es over, which does not dir ectly compr ehend wor ds
or ideas. Instead, it’s immediately impacted by body
language.
The right body language for delivering bad news is one of
warmth: car e, concer n, understanding, and empathy .
Essentially, demonstrate as much kindness charisma as you
can. The worse the news, the mor e important it is for the
recipient to feel that you truly understand them, and that
you ar e ther e with them. This is wher e the inter nal tools of
goodwill, compassion, and empathy come in.

--- PAGE 209 ---
First, get yourself into the right inter nal state. A ccess
compassion so that it plays out acr oss your body
language.
Put yourself in their shoes; imagine in vivid detail what
it’s lik e inside their head, inside their life.
Imagine both of you with angel wings working towar d a
common mission.
Focus on a compassionate phrase, such as “ Just love as
much as you can fr om wher ever you ar e.”
Try to convey empathy in your facial e xpressions, your
tone of voice, and your wor ds.
The right verbal language for delivering bad news
depends on what kind of diﬃcult message you have to
deliver . In most cases, you can follow the suggestions
cover ed in Chapter 8 : mak e the message r elevant to them;
use their wor ds, analogies, and metaphors. If you’r e
delivering this message to a lar ger audience, go to page
000 for the section on pr esentations.
Make sur e that thr oughout your interaction you e xpress
your car e and concer n both nonverbally and verbally; tell
them, if appr opriate, what you would lik e to do to ease their
discomfort. Show that you fully understand not just how
unwelcome the news is but also the ramiﬁcations it could
have for them.
Throughout the e xperience, tur n your kindness charisma
not just towar d them but also towar d yourself . Use all the
internal tools you’ve gained to handle this diﬃcult
experience as best as you can and k eep giving yourself
praise and encouragement. Y ou’re doing your best.
Delivering Criticism
“Honest criticism is har d to tak e, particularly fr om a r elative,
a friend, an acquaintance, or a stranger,” said humorist
Franklin Jones. Have you ever winced at the mer e memory

--- PAGE 210 ---
of a comment hear d years ago? F ew things sting as badly or
last as long as a nasty comment.
For many of my clients, having to occasionally deliver
negative feedback is the worst part of their jobs. Many tell
me that when they know they have criticism to deliver, they
walk ar ound with a knot in their stomach all day, dr eading
the upcoming conversation.
Unfortunately, criticism—lik e dental e xams, airport
security, and, depending on whom you ask, tax es—is a
necessary evil. Y ou may not lik e it, but sometimes you just
have to do it. A t some point in your life, someone —whether
it’s a par ent, spouse, friend, colleague, or boss—will do
something wr ong and you’ll have to tell them about it. The
question, of course, is how to do it right.
There are four crucial steps to charismatically delivering
criticism.
First, think about your timing and the location . Try to
be as empathetic as possible in your choice of both.
Consider the individual’s levels of str ess and fatigue. W ith
criticism (or with “constructive feedback”), try to pr ovide it
as soon as possible af ter witnessing the behavior you want
to change. Just be sur e the person is in a physically and
emotionally r eceptive state when you do so .
Second, get into the right mindset, one of
compassion and empathy . Yes, even when delivering
criticism, your compassion will play out acr oss your body
language and aﬀect the entir e interaction in a positive way .
Warmth is also important her e. Accessing kindness or focus
charisma will ease the situation, wher eas authority charisma
would worsen it.
When people feel that you have their best inter ests at
heart, it can change the dynamic entir ely. Chris, an
executive fr om L os Angeles, told me about a for mer boss
who he felt was truly invested in his success. This boss,
when pointing out ar eas of impr ovement, would r emind
Chris that he wanted him to be pr omoted as soon as

--- PAGE 211 ---
possible and that’s why he was pointing out the things that
needed to be better .
To access the right mental state, you can also try thinking
of a person whom you highly r espect just befor e you deliver
criticism. Y ou might think of a favorite grandpar ent, mentor,
spiritual ﬁgur e, or anyone who is important to you. If you
were to mak e this comment to them, or in fr ont of them,
how would you wor d your criticism? In what ways do you
see your comments changing now? T ry to r emind yourself of
this r egularly thr oughout the diﬃcult conversation and
imagine the r espected mentor watching you.
Third, decide exactly what points you want to mak e:
be speciﬁc . Focusing on a few k ey points rather than
making an e xhaustive list will pr event the other person fr om
feeling overwhelmed. In addition, if your criticism is too
general, their danger -wary brain might imagine the worst
possible interpr etations of your message.
Fourth, depersonalize.  As much as possible,
communicate that what you’re critiquing is the
behavior , not the person.  It’s har der to ﬁnd common
ground when someone feels that their intentions or
character traits have been criticized. Be very wary of
assuming you’ve accurately guessed a person’s motives.
Instead, focus on observed behaviors and veriﬁed facts.
Even when focusing on the behavior, aim to mak e the
criticism as impersonal as possible. The wr ong way to do
this would be to say : “Why do you always pr ocrastinate on
presentations until the very last minute?” This is both
personal and generalized. Instead, zer o in on one observed
behavior : “When you wait until the very last minute to
prepare the pr esentation, I feel anxious.” A fter all, we create
the feelings of anxiety in our bodies—it’s our decision to
become upset. If possible, don’t mention their actions at all.
Just e xplain what’s going on for you: “When I don’t see a
ﬁnished pr esentation until the last minute, I feel anxious.”

--- PAGE 212 ---
Critical Delivery
Now that you’ve thought about timing and location and
chosen the speciﬁc, empathetically phrased points you want
to mak e, you’r e ready to start charismatically delivering the
diﬃcult feedback. It’s important to start oﬀ on the right foot.
The way you begin will gr eatly aﬀect people’s per ception of
the conversation.
Human beings r emember “ﬁrsts”—the ﬁrst time
something happens, or the beginning of an e xperience—and
we tend to r emember “lasts” as well. In a study done on
patients who had r eceived a colonoscopy e xam, some wer e
given a full e xam for thr ee minutes, while others r eceived a
longer e xam but the device was held immobile during the
ﬁnal two minutes, ther eby ﬁnishing the pr ocedur e on a far
less painful note. This second gr oup of patients r emember ed
the entir e exam as less painful, and they wer e mor e willing
to under go the pr ocedur e a second time. 3
If you start your criticism with a positive beginning, it will
aﬀect the r est of the e xperience. In the ﬁrst moments, when
people ar e most appr ehensive, what they need is
reassurance. Y ou can give them solid gr ound to stand on by
expressing the fact that you value them—that you r ecognize
their worth as human beings, and that they matter to you as
colleagues, as clients.
Once they ar e reassur ed of their own worth, people will
accept your comments far mor e easily, and they’ll get less
defensive. Indeed, this step may be the most important one
to mitigate a defensive r eaction. Defensiveness, af ter all, is
often just the outwar d face of fear and insecurity .
Let’s say a colleague has been falling behind on his
commitments. Instead of pointing to this fact dir ectly, ﬁrst
acknowledge his many positive contributions. This way, he
will feel that his entir e history is fairly r ecognized. It also
recognizes the behavior as momentary, a lapse in otherwise
good behavior .

--- PAGE 213 ---
Once you’ve started on a positive note, you can bring up
the actual issue you want to addr ess. T ell people e xactly
what you want to see fr om them, as opposed to what you
don’t want to see. T eachers ar e taught “ Don’t have don’t
rules,” war ning them that if they tell their class, for
instance, to “ not put the beans in their ears,” they might
ﬁnd half the students pr omptly doing so .
When you tell the person you ar e criticizing the cor rective
action you’d lik e to see, depersonalize the behavior change
just as you had the criticism. R ather than asking, “ Could you
get the pr esentation done earlier?” say, “In the futur e, I’d
greatly appr eciate it if the pr esentation could be r eady a few
days in advance.” That tak es who was right or wr ong oﬀ the
table and focuses instead on something you can both agr ee
on without anyone having to win or lose.
Just as when dealing with a diﬃcult person, try to avoid
making people feel wr ong when you’r e delivering criticism.
When someone is told they’r e wrong, even when they do
realize they’r e at fault, they will of ten strive to justif y
themselves; it can both wound their ego and ar ouse their
resentment, leading them to discr edit you in an attempt to
lessen their own guilt.
Legendary diplomat Benjamin F ranklin admitted in his
memoirs to lear ning this lesson the har d way . As a young
man, having found one of his adversaries in er ror, he felt
quite right in pointing out the er ror, pr oving beyond the
shadow of a doubt that the man had er red. He made his
point—and he made an enemy for life. F ranklin came to
realize that the short-lived pleasur e of being right was not
worth the long-ter m negative consequences. F rom then on,
he adopted the practice of “denying [himself] the pleasur e
of contradicting others.” He would instead begin by
observing that “in certain cases or cir cumstances his
opinion would be right, but in the pr esent case ther e
appear ed to be some diﬀer ence.”

--- PAGE 214 ---
You can tak e a similar path by saying: “Y ou know, I might
not be explaining this the right way . Let me try again.”
Choose the high r oad. Being a charismatic communicator
means that others feel good about themselves when they
are with you. It means that others look forwar d to being with
you because they lik e themselves better as a r esult of being
around you.
As always, body language matters her e. You can tell
someone that you think they’r e wrong with a look,
intonation, or gestur e just as eloquently as you can in
words. So use all the tools in your arsenal to stay in an
internal state of calm and goodwill. Y our body language will
follow .
It’s absolutely critical thr oughout diﬃcult conversations to
stay attentive to any signals that the other person might be
getting defensive. When you sense defensiveness, whether
through their facial e xpressions, body language, or tone of
voice, dial up your war mth to move them back into a mor e
positive frame of mind. Y ou can do this in two ways:
Verbally:  Encourage positive mental associations. F or
example, mention something they’ve done well in the
past or something in this situation that you appr ove of .
Nonverbally:  Use your body language to inﬂuence
theirs. Get back into a state of goodwill so that it plays
out acr oss your face. The mir ror neur ons in their brain
will replicate the emotions they’r e seeing in you, putting
them in a mor e positive state of mind as well.
When closing the conversation, if you can, aim to end on a
positive note. R emember how important beginnings and
endings ar e—they can color the whole interaction. This is
when you can put the emphasis on thr ee important points:
Next steps:  Review the steps that will be tak en to
improve the situation, particularly if you’r e going to do

--- PAGE 215 ---
any of it together . Give the sense of constructive,
forwar d motion.
Appreciation:  Tell them how much you appr eciate how
well they took your feedback. P raise even the slightest
good eﬀort here; you’r e providing positive r einfor cement
so they’ll impr ove over time.
A positive future:  Bring up anything that both of you
can look forwar d to in the futur e, such as e xciting
events or upcoming pr ojects—whatever conveys the
fact that you’r e looking forwar d to futur e interactions.
Apologies: What to Do  
When Things Go W rong
So you scr ewed up. Y ou hit REPLY ALL by mistak e, you didn’t
check the numbers, the dog ate your homework. Call it what
you will, something bad happened, and, whether they’r e
right or wr ong, someone thinks it’s your fault. F ear not. If
you play your car ds well, even embar rassing blunders can
be tur ned ar ound.
Having a disagr eement or a conﬂict can actually impr ove
a relationship and be a gr eat thing in the end. When a
relationship has gone well fr om the start, ther e might be in
the back of our mind a slight hesitancy . Everything has gone
well so far, but what if that changes? How would they r eact
then? Once you get thr ough a diﬃcult situation and it was
well handled, you know that the r elationship can withstand
diﬃculty . The appr ehension is r esolved.
One of my very ﬁrst clients told me that he actually
welcomed making minor mistak es, especially early on in a
business r elationship. “Most people do such a piss-poor job
of apologizing that just by being half way decent at it, you’ll
be head and shoulders above the r est.” Another
entrepreneur told me: “I have a pr etty good track r ecord of

--- PAGE 216 ---
turning scr ew-ups into up-sells.” So let’s see how you can
approach, conduct, and conclude apologies charismatically .
First, as always, get into the right mental state. This
means, ﬁrst and for emost, for giving yourself . Yes, I’m
serious. Though it may sound counterintuitive, having
warmth towar d yourself—even though you may be at fault—
is necessary to pr event making the situation worse thr ough
negative body language. It will gr eatly help avoid any sign
of defensiveness in either your voice, your postur e, or any
part of your facial e xpression. So use all the tools we’ve
cover ed to access and stay in a state of self -compassion.
Forgiving yourself and getting into a good mental state
also helps you avoid appearing overly apologetic,
subservient, or insecur e. With the conﬁdence that
accompanies a positive inter nal state you can embody both
warmth and contrition, yet still be seen as coming fr om a
place of str ength.
Now that you’r e in the right mental state, let’s tur n to the
other person. The graver the oﬀense, the mor e you should
strive for a personal touch. T o be satisﬁed, the person
receiving the apology may need to see r emorse in your face
or, at the very least, hear it in your voice.
Because so much of our communication is nonverbal,
when you apologize in person you have the gr eatest
number of tools at your disposal: body language, facial
expressions, and vocal tone, in addition to your choice of
words. On the phone, you have only your voice and wor ds to
work with, and you have even fewer instruments at your
disposal in an e-mail.
On the other hand, some people ﬁnd it easier to handle
such diﬃcult situations with the distance that a written
medium pr ovides. W ritten communication has the
advantage that you can put hours of thinking into a few
lines of communication, and r eally get them right. P utting
something in writing can also be a powerful statement. Y ou

--- PAGE 217 ---
are in a sense making it per manent; you ar e willing to be
held to account.
In this case, as with so many of the charisma-enhancing
techniques, it will be a question of what is the best ﬁt
considering your preferences, your best guess of their
preferences, and what the logistics, timing, and conte xt
allow .
Hear Them Out
Whether you’r e apologizing in person or on the phone, your
ﬁrst concer n is to let the other person have their say . The
simplest and most eﬀective way to do so is just to listen:
give them the complete pr esence of focus charisma. Now,
I’m not saying that putting this into practice is easy . For
each grievance your counterpart utters, you might have a
dozen r etorts bubbling up in your mind. But at this point,
interrupting is the worst move you could possibly mak e. No
matter how brilliant you ar e, no matter how right your
rejoinder, they will feel belittled rather than accepted and
understood.
While you listen, be fully pr esent, and try to avoid
preparing your r esponse. Instead, focus your entir e
attention on deter mining pr ecisely what the complaint is.
Ask questions to mak e sur e you understand. If someone
says, “I just don’t feel good about the way this meeting
went,” ask, “ Could you tell me mor e? I r eally want to
understand. What is it about the meeting that made you
uncomfortable? W as it the people, the timing, or something
else altogether?” Y ou can also try to r estate your
counterpart’s complaints in your own wor ds. You’ll know
you’ve listened enough when they say, “ Am I talking too
much?”
Goodwill Matters Here, T oo

--- PAGE 218 ---
Just coming into a conversation with the mindset of “ Help
me understand how you see things” can change the
outcome completely . The simple fact of being in an open
mental stance aﬀects your voice, your facial e xpressions,
the wor ds you use, and your body postur e, and it
dramatically changes the emotional tenor of the interaction.
Your goodwill is written acr oss your face and shows up in
your every micr oexpression.
Use any of the inter nal tools we’ve cover ed to inject
warmth into the interaction, and call on your kindness
charisma. Think of k eeping your chin down, your eyes wide
open, and your voice war m and slow, leaving fr equent
pauses to mak e room for the other person to jump in should
they feel the ur ge to do so .
Once you’r e sur e that you fully understand the complaint,
and if you agr ee that the fault was yours, a true-blue
apology is in or der. Surprisingly, your wor ding can be very
simple (again, body language is what r eally matters). A
simple “I’m very sor ry” deliver ed with full pr esence and full
warmth can work wonders.
What matters is the thoughtfulness, concer n, and sense of
personal involvement that you convey . Ther e is, for
instance, a signiﬁcant diﬀer ence between saying “I’m sor ry”
rather than just “Sor ry.” The ﬁrst shows that you, personally,
identif y with and feel touched by the situation they’r e in.
Sincerity is k ey: you need to sound as if you r eally mean it,
rather than just apologizing to calm them down.
Show that you understand not only the dir ect
consequences of your actions (or inaction) but also their
ramiﬁcations. In a business conte xt, you might show that
you understand how this mistak e impacts their goals or the
success of their business. Then show what you will do to
make things right or to mak e sur e it never happens again.
What steps will you tak e? Be as concr ete as possible.
Mistak es happen, even to the best of us. But if you put
these principles into practice, even your missteps can

--- PAGE 219 ---
become opportunities. When well handled, these diﬃcult
interactions can become bonding e xperiences, and your
relationships can gain a new depth.
Phone and E-mail
As far as charisma is concer ned, phone and e-mail
communication come with speciﬁc challenges. Clearly,
much of nonverbal communication is lost. On the phone,
you lose all visual communication, and thr ough e-mail you
lose everything but wor ds. In addition, e-mail doesn’t allow
you to mak e midcourse cor rections based on how the other
person is r esponding.
However, the main principles r emain valid: think of the
timing, the setting, and the situation the person may be in.
Plan the or der in which you write e-mails and phone calls
from least to most important, to impr ove with practice. Y ou
can also use visualizations befor e important calls and e-
mails to get into the right mental state so that the right
words and tone ﬂow eﬀortlessly .
On the phone, always ask, “Is this a good time for you?”
befor e launching into conversation. No matter how
important your infor mation or how pleasant your call, bad
timing means bad r esults for you. The person may be under
a deadline or in the midst of a crisis.
Once you’r e in a conversation, pay attention. Y ou need to
be as focused as if you wer e face-to -face—per haps even
more so, as you have fewer visual clues (such as body
language) to r ead and must r ely only on auditory signals.
Focus and be quiet. Do you think you can get away with
eating, drinking, or working on your computer while talking
on the phone? Not so fast. Eating and drinking ar e out. Even
if you think you’r e being quiet, the person will hear you
chewing and swallowing because r eceivers ar e speciﬁcally
made to amplif y sound. P eople will just as sur ely hear you

--- PAGE 220 ---
typing and wonder what it is you’r e really paying attention
to.
Reading your e-mail or surﬁng the W eb ar e also
inadvisable—too of ten, this will cause a slight lag in your
response time, which will mak e you sound lik e your mind is
wandering.
Delayed vocal r esponse can have the same eﬀect as
delayed facial e xpressions. If your mind is wandering, your
distraction might show . Being pr esent on the phone is at
least as important as it is in person. In fact, it’s easier to
project pr esence in person because of the many diﬀer ent
ways you can communicate. By phone, you need to work
that much har der at it for it to be r eceived.
To communicate pr esence, Michael F euer, the founder of
OﬃceMax, says that he of ten closes his eyes when listening.
I was struck by how good a listener he was: even on the
phone, I could feel the intensity of his listening, how well he
absorbed everything I was saying.
For best r esults, get up fr om your desk and away fr om all
distractions. Stay standing and walk ar ound (your voice will
sound mor e ener getic) while focusing entir ely on the phone
call. Just as actors do when they lend their voices to
puppets, use the same body language techniques as you
would in person. As actors know, this will gr eatly enhance
your voice. R emember the smile studies that showed that
listeners could identif y sixteen diﬀer ent types of smiles
based on sound alone.
Listen to what the other person is saying and what’s going
on in the backgr ound. If you hear the other phone line ring,
ask if he needs to answer it, and assur e him that it’s all right
with you. He’ll appr eciate it, and you don’t want his brain
split between vaguely listening to you and trying to ﬁgur e
out whom the other caller may be.
Here’s one speciﬁc—and surprisingly eﬀective—
recommendation for phone charisma, courtesy of author L eil
Lowndes: Do not answer the phone in a war m or friendly

--- PAGE 221 ---
manner . Instead, answer crisply and pr ofessionally . Then,
only af ter you hear who is calling, let war mth or even
enthusiasm pour forth in your voice. This simple technique
is an easy and eﬀective way to mak e people feel special. I
recommend it to all my business clients whose companies
have a str ong customer service component. The gains in
customer satisfaction ar e impr essive.
When writing e-mails, you can apply all the tools and
principles you’ve lear ned in the past sections. R eview a few
of your past e-mail messages. How of ten does the wor d I
appear, as opposed to the wor d you? Does the e-mail speak
about you and your inter ests ﬁrst? Don’t try to ﬁght your
natural tendency (we’r e har dwired to primarily car e about
ourselves, af ter all). Instead, write out the e-mail as you
normally would, but befor e you send it, simply cut and paste
so that whatever pertains to the other person appears ﬁrst
and most pr ominently .
You can also do this with your mark eting materials,
whether it be your W eb site, br ochur es, or anything that
represents you or your company to the world. When
consulting to lar ge ﬁr ms I of ten recommend that they go
through their mark eting materials (you can do the same
with your e-mails) using two diﬀer ent-color ed highlighters,
one for things r elating to them and the other for sentences
that speak to their potential clients. If the second color
doesn’t pr edominate, they have a pr oblem.
Just as in speaking, watch the r eturn on investment of
your sentences: measur e the length of your e-mail against
the value it was delivering. I give many of my clients the
assignment to r ead over their e-mails befor e they send
them. They must trim as many e xtra wor ds as possible until
there is nothing lef t that could be deleted. T o paraphrase
Antoine de Saint-Exupéry, author of The Little P rince:
perfection is not when ther e is no mor e to add, but when
there is no mor e to subtract.

--- PAGE 222 ---
KEY T AKEA WAYS
 Appr oach diﬃcult people individually and choose the right
charisma style for each person and each situation.
 Expr ess appr eciation for their help or positive impact: it’ll
make them rationalize their actions in your favor .
 When delivering bad news, get into a state of compassion,
and show war mth and car e in your timing, body language,
and verbal language.
 When delivering criticism, get into a state of goodwill, and
focus the r equest for change on speciﬁc behaviors rather
than on personal traits.
 When delivering apologies, show pr esence in hearing
them out completely, show war mth in your apology, and
show power in how you’ll cor rect the mistak e or pr event
its reoccur rence.
 With phone and e-mail communication, use all the tools
you’ve lear ned for in-person communication.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 223 ---
1 1
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 224 ---
Presenting with Charisma
IT WAS THE  mak e-or-break moment of David’s car eer. He had
joined the company six months befor e, and although he’d
work ed day and night to pr ove his value, his cowork ers
hadn’t yet accepted him. The CEO, who had pushed for
David’s hiring and r eally believed in his potential, decided to
give him one big chance to shine. He gave David the
leadership r ole in a pr oject that would deﬁne the company’s
futur e. David would be pr esenting his pr oposed strategy
befor e the entir e management committee. He knew that he
would be given only one shot. “Which charisma style should
I use?” he ask ed me. “I’ve got to get this perfect.”
Charismatic public speaking engages several charisma
styles. In this section, you’ll lear n how to:
Construct an inspiring and motivational pr esentation
using visionary charisma
Command your audience’s attention and r espect using
authority charisma
Connect to your audience using kindness charisma
The following r ecommendations ar e valid whether you’r e
presenting to a very small gr oup or a very lar ge one. In fact,
these guidelines can even be highly r elevant when you’r e
aiming to inspir e, inﬂuence, or persuade an audience of one.
So whether you’r e delivering a k eynote at a confer ence or
pitching a new idea to your boss, the following techniques
will guide you thr ough craf ting your message, choosing your
words, and perfecting your delivery until your pr esentations
are simply ir resistible.

--- PAGE 225 ---
Constructing a Charismatic Message
For most of us, pr esentations ar e about convincing people of
something—an idea, an initiative, a course of action. Though
we’ll cover a complete set of techniques for charismatic
messaging, it all starts with knowing whom e xactly we’r e
aiming to persuade.
The New Y ork T imes —one of the best and most r espected
newspapers in the United States—is purportedly written so
simply that a tenth grader can understand it. 1 The paper’s
readership includes highly educated business e xecutives,
successful entr epreneurs, and CEOs. But the editors know
that their r eaders ar e often thinking about six things at
once, juggling far too many balls in the air .
You, too, will of ten be communicating with attention-
starved audiences who will devote only part of their
attention to what you ar e saying. If you can k eep this one
fact ﬁr mly in mind while you craf t your pr esentation, and
design your speech accor dingly, you’ll be mor e eﬀective
than 80 per cent of the speak ers out ther e.
Let’s say you’r e giving a pr esentation at four P.M. on a
Wednesday af ternoon. Y our audience has been thinking,
acting, interacting, and dealing with issues since they wok e
up that mor ning. Whatever has been occupying their minds
since then doesn’t magically vanish when they enter the
room to attend your pr esentation. It all stays in their heads,
and you may have to compete with it for their attention.
Select the single most important idea you want to convey
and mak e it as crystal clear and easy to understand as you
possibly can. Ideally, you should be able to articulate your
message in one sentence.
Within this one main message, have thr ee to ﬁve k ey
supporting points. The human brain thinks in triads (fr om
Olympic medals to fairy tales, it’s thr ee medals, thr ee
princes, thr ee bears), and it cannot immediately
compr ehend numbers gr eater than four .* Each one of your

--- PAGE 226 ---
supporting points should open with entertaining anecdotes,
fascinating facts, compelling statistics, gr eat metaphors,
examples, and analogies.
Stories  have a particularly str ong impact on people. In
fact, audiences will of ten remember ﬁrst the story, and only
second the point the story was making. Since the dawn of
time, people have been telling stories as a way to transmit
information to one another .
For your stories to be most eﬀective, choose characters
that ar e similar to the people in your audience to mak e
them mor e relatable and mak e them as entertaining (and
short!) as a Hollywood sneak pr eview . When you’r e
delivering a pr esentation, you’r e in the entertainment
business, whether you know it or not. So mak e the story
dramatic. Y ou’re calling on visionary charisma her e; and as
with all for ms of charisma, you’r e tapping into people’s
emotional side.
Using metaphors  and analogies  can be a highly
eﬀective way of capturing your audience’s imagination. F or
maximum impact, choose images and analogies that would
appeal to a young audience. The speeches that give us a
feeling of awe and wonder ar e those that appeal to our
childhood r oots. If you’r e mentioning the fact that ther e is
untapped potential in your customer base, lik en yourselves
to “bounty hunters” or “tr easur e hunters” sear ching for
“hidden gold.”
Make even numbers and statistics  personal,
meaningful, and r elatable for your audience. Steve Jobs did
this masterfully when he gave his audience two ways of
measuring iPhone sales: “ Apple sold four million iPhones so
far,” he said. “That amounts to selling twenty thousand
iPhones every single day .” He did even better with memory
cards: “This memory car d has twelve gigabytes of memory .
That means it holds enough music for you to travel to the
moon and back.”

--- PAGE 227 ---
Whether you use a story, e xample, number, or statistic,
make sur e that you close with either a clear point or a
transition to the action step you want your audience to tak e.
Remember to mak e this so simple that even a multitasking,
partially listening audience member would get it.
When you craf t the closing of your pr esentation, k eep in
mind that we r emember primarily beginnings and endings.
Just as you want to start on a high note, you also want to
end on a high note, so avoid ending with Q&A . It’s har d to
have a question-and-answer period as compelling and
energetic as your main speech. Almost inevitably, the Q&A
period lowers the ener gy.
Personally, I avoid for mal Q&A entir ely. Instead, my
introducer war ns the audience that ther e will be no Q&A
session at the end, so their one and only chance to ask
questions is during the speech. This has the added
advantage of incr easing the audience’s involvement,
participation, and general ener gy level.
Once you’ve cr eated your structur e, you can start craf ting
your sentences. The pointers given in Chapter 8  will also
help you choose your wor ds her e:
It’s all about them. Use the wor d you as of ten as
possible. Use their wor ds, their stories, their metaphors:
hole in one  for golfers, shipwr eck for sailors. T ry also to
match your verbs to your audience: lead or initiate  for
businessmen, build  for engineers, craft for artists.
Get graphic. The brain thinks in pictur es, so choose
language that is vivid and sensory -rich.
Bewar e of negotiations: avoid the “ no pr oblem” trap.
Keep it short. W ith each sentence, ask yourself : What
value is this sentence delivering? Even when craf ting
stories, give only details that convey compr ehension or
enjoyment. Think sneak pr eview, not full-length movie.

--- PAGE 228 ---
Creating a Charismatic Appearance
You’re going to be in the spotlight, so think car efully about
the message you want to convey thr ough your clothing. Is it
authority? P ower? W armth? K eep in mind what social
psychologists’ r esear ch reveals about chr omatic eﬀects: 2
Red conveys ener gy, passion. W ear red to wak e up an
audience.
Black shows you’r e serious and that you won’t tak e no
for an answer .
White e xudes honesty and innocence, which is why
defendants of ten choose it in the courtr oom.
Blue emits trust. The dark er the shade, the deeper the
level of trust it elicits.
Gray is a good neutral, the quintessential color of
business.
Orange and yellow ar e not r ecommended. Because they
are the ﬁrst to attract the human eye, they ar e also the
ﬁrst to tir e it.
Based on these guidelines, one of my clients adopted a
go-to combination whenever she had a diﬃcult message to
convey : navy suit, white shirt, white pearl stud ear rings
(perhaps because pearls seem conservative, they have
been shown to further enhance cr edibility).
In order to pr oject conﬁdence and move with ease on
stage, you also need to feel physically conﬁdent. Mak e sur e
nothing is hindering your movements, impairing your
balance, or in any other way diminishing your comfort. It’s
hard enough to feel fully comfortable on stage while facing
an audience alone, without having to deal with physical
discomfort on top of it all! This means wearing clothing you
can br eathe in and shoes that ar e stable. Y our brain’s ﬁrst
job is to monitor your safety, whether it’s your ability to
escape pr edators or your ability to stay upright. If it has to

--- PAGE 229 ---
spend any of its attention wor rying about your br eathing or
your balance, that means that at least one part of your
attention can’t be devoted to your speaking success. Why
waste any of your focus?
Rehearsing for Charisma
When celebrity comedian Jer ry Seinfeld ﬁnally got his ﬁrst
chance at the big time—a six-minute spot on The T onight
Show— he practiced those six minutes for six months . As he
recalls, “ By the end of those six months, you could have
slapped me, shak en me, or held me under water, I would
have still given you those six minutes with pitch-perfect
timing.”
Charisma tak es practice. Steve Jobs, who appear ed so
masterful on stage, was known to r ehearse important
presentations r elentlessly . Just as a duck appears to be
sailing smoothly on the surface of a lak e while powerfully
paddling below the waterline, it tak es a whole lot of eﬀort
for a pr esentation to appear eﬀortless. When a speech is
important I practice until every br eath is perfect, because
knowing I’ve got the speech so well master ed allows me to
be spontaneous. I know that I have muscle memory to fall
back on.
When you know that a particular pr esentation will have a
signiﬁcant impact on your car eer, it’s worth r ehearsing until
you feel that it’s part of your very bones. One inter esting
technique used by magicians is to run thr ough the entir e
presentation once with their eyes closed.
Another good practice is to have your speech audiotaped
or, better yet, videotaped, and to count what pr ofessional
speak ers call irritants.  These ar e any sounds or movements
that do not add to your message. Because the audience is
watching your every move, every sound and facial
expression you mak e is a for m of communication that

--- PAGE 230 ---
demands a portion of their attention. Be strategic: mak e
sure you’r e getting value out of each nonverbal gestur e you
make, and limit superﬂuous gestur es to avoid wasting any
bit of your audience’s attention.
If you’ve been videotaped, ask thr ee people to point out
any unnecessary gestur es—any tics or distractions. If you’ve
been audiotaped, have the speech transcribed and ask
them to note every “um” and “ah.” Don’t do it yourself—it’s
much har der to hear our own ir ritants, and transcription
services ar e ine xpensive.
If you can, perfor m the entir e speech at least once in fr ont
of a live audience as a trial run. No matter how well you’ve
practiced your presentation on your own, the dynamics
change dramatically when you pr esent the same
information to living, br eathing people.
Professional stand-up comedians or ganize trial runs for
themselves, perfor ming at smaller clubs wher e they can test
out new material in a lower -stak es envir onment. Jer ry
Seinfeld still does this, occasionally making unscheduled
appearances in New Y ork City comedy clubs to work on his
act.
Like comedians who perfor m at small clubs to perfect their
acts, you, too, need a place wher e you can br eak in your
sales pitch, your script, or your interview lines in fr ont of
real live people. Ideally, you would ﬁnd an audience
somewhat similar to the one you’r e going to addr ess
(whether in age or pr ofession or level of e xperience), but in
a pinch, friends and family will do .
Projecting Power
Charismatic speak ers know how to give the impr ession that
they’r e as comfortable walking acr oss the stage as they
would be walking acr oss their living r oom. This is called

--- PAGE 231 ---
owning the stage,  and ther e are three tricks to making it
happen.
First, when you stand, be sur e to have a wide stance, well
balanced on both feet. Not only will you feel mor e conﬁdent,
you’ll also look mor e conﬁdent, mor e stable, than if you
were standing on one foot. W ide, stable stances also help
you to pr oject conﬁdence. Be the gorilla!
Second, practice without a podium or a lecter n. Speaking
behind one can give the impr ession that you’r e fearful to
ventur e out, and pr efer staying behind the safety of a
shield. It also mak es the pr esentation much mor e static.
Think of the ster eotype of a boring pr esentation: a lectur er
who stands immobile at his lecter n, reading fr om his notes
in a monotone voice. Moving comfortably ar ound the stage
will mak e you appear much mor e conﬁdent, powerful, and
charismatic.
Third, ﬁnd the right volume to pr oject conﬁdence. This is
tricky, as so much can depend on the micr ophone you’r e
given that day or how the sound system is set up. Y our best
bet is, just befor e the speech, to ask a few people sitting in
the back of the r oom to be your sound e xperts and give you
a prearranged signal to raise or lower your volume if need
be.
Projecting W armth
Franklin Delano R oosevelt changed everything. A t least, as
far as pr esidential speeches go .
Up until then, pr esidential addr esses wer e formal aﬀairs
given in solemn tones. And then came FDR and his “ﬁr eside
chats.” Suddenly the e xperience of listening to the pr esident
of the United States became a war m, intimate conversation.
Today, gr eat public speak ers emulate the ﬁr eside chat
atmospher e: no matter how many people ar e in the
audience, you feel as if they’r e speaking dir ectly to you.

--- PAGE 232 ---
A ﬁreside chat is a comfortable conversation that cr eates
a sense of intimacy . Imagine sitting by a ﬁr e telling stories
to your favorite friends or having a comfortable
conversation with just one person. T o mak e your audience
feel particularly special, speak as if you wer e sharing a
secret.
Another way to mak e people feel special as you r oam
about the stage is to give one to two seconds of eye contact
per person. Though this may sound lik e a short amount of
time, I pr omise that in the midst of a speech it feels lik e an
eternity. But it’s worth it. This is how charismatic speak ers
give you the feeling that they ar e speaking dir ectly to you—
giving each person in the audience the feeling that they
shared a r eal connection. Y ou can mak e this easier by
making eye contact ﬁrst with the people who seem the most
animated—those who ar e smiling, showing inter est, or
nodding.
To create this sense of comfort and intimacy, David (the
new e xecutive who was pr eparing his crucial pr esentation)
focused on pr ojecting war mth. He made good use of the
internal tools detailed in Chapter 5 , especially the angel
wings visualization. He told himself that the people he was
presenting to wer e his angels, gather ed her e to work
together . He told me that he felt a kind of war m pride, a
surge of aﬀection for his audience that he knew was
palpable.
David also focused on incr easing his voice ﬂuctuation to
enhance persuasiveness, on smiling when he wanted a
warm voice, and on dr opping the intonation of his voice
when he wanted to convey conﬁdence and authority .
David called me within hours of delivering his pr esentation
with the wonderful news that it had been a major triumph:
he’d been so inspirational that people came up to him for
days af terwar d to e xpress their admiration.

--- PAGE 233 ---
Pause, Breathe, and Slow Down
When I wok e up on the mor ning of my very ﬁrst speech, I
was feeling quite conﬁdent. It was a short, easy piece,
encouraging my fellow students to donate blood for the
local childr en’s hospital. I’d been granted the ﬁrst ﬁve
minutes of a plenary lectur e, so I knew that I would be
facing a full auditorium, but saying a few wor ds for a good
cause seemed easy . I was eighteen years old, and though I
had never faced an audience of twelve hundr ed befor e, I
thought, “ Really, how har d could this be?” In fact, I was
quite eager to bask in the spotlight and climbed the stairs
leading to the stage with assurance and aplomb.
But with each step, mor e butterﬂies started ﬂuttering in
my stomach. By the time I r eached the top, I was feeling
ever so slightly out of br eath. When I tur ned to face the
audience, r eality hit me lik e a ton of bricks: a sea of faces,
twelve hundr ed pairs of eyes looking e xpectantly at me. My
mind fr oze in panic, and I went thr ough the entir e speech
nearly without br eathing. In case you wer e wondering, this
is oﬃcially not a good idea . By the time I ﬁnished I could
barely see, the lights blur ring in fr ont of my eyes. T o this
day, I’m not quite sur e just how I made it oﬀ the platfor m.
For the ne xt ﬁve years, every speech outline I pr epared
was emblazoned with one bold wor d scrawled acr oss the top
of every page: BREA THE!  Today, when lear ning a new
speech, I’ll of ten still include notes to myself every few
pages: Pause. Br eathe. Slow Down.
Though this may feel unnecessary in the comfort of home
or oﬃce, things ar e very diﬀer ent on stage. In the heat of
the moment, with adr enaline ﬂowing thr ough your veins,
your brain speeds up. This is why everything ar ound you
can seem to be happening in slow motion. W ith your brain
going on hyper drive, you’ll also tend to speak faster . But
your audience is still operating at nor mal speed.

--- PAGE 234 ---
In addition to practicing, it can be helpful to ask a member
of the audience to give you a pr earranged signal r eminding
you to slow down. It’s r eally worth paying attention to your
tempo because the slower you speak, the mor e thoughtful
and deliberate you will sound, and the mor e attention
people will give to what you say .
During that ﬁrst speech, I felt certain that if I wer e to
pause even for an instant, I’d lose my audience’s attention
forever. It tak es courage to pause. But, just as in
conversations, pausing r egularly during your pr esentations
is an important skill to acquir e. It’s one of the hallmarks of
eﬀective speak ers and r eally is one of the k ey tools for gr eat
speaking. Thr oughout your speech, pause fr equently,
deliberately . Have the conﬁdence to mak e your listeners
wait for your wor ds. It’s called a dramatic pause  for a
reason: it adds drama.
After delivering a k ey point or an impactful story, pause
for a few seconds to let your audience tak e it in. If you’ve
just used humor, have the courage to wait for the laughter
to swell and subside befor e you move on. P ausing is
important both to begin and to end your speeches. When
you walk on stage, come to the center, face the audience,
and stop. R emain completely silent as you count thr ee full
seconds while slowly sweeping your eyes acr oss the cr owd
and making eye contact. This may feel endless, but it will be
well worth it. Nothing rivets an audience’s attention lik e this
kind of silence.
Pausing is equally critical to end your pr esentations. Don’t
run oﬀ stage. Sicilienne  is a slow, somber piece of music by
composer Gabriel F auré. A young musician told me: “The
pause at the very end, right af ter the last note, is so critical
that without it, the entir e perfor mance is ruined. On the
other hand, when done right, the audience is so spellbound
that of ten not a single person stirs for a full minute.” A fter
your last wor ds, pause, then say “Thank you” and stay ther e
while you endur e the applause for a few seconds.

--- PAGE 235 ---
If you’r e having tr ouble pausing, try color -coding your
speeches. I used this technique for years when I ﬁrst started
out. I would use one blue bar for a one-beat pause, two r ed
bars for a two -beat pause (having the diﬀer ence both in
color and in markings helps in the heat of the moment,
when your mind is racing and you can’t think clearly).
I would also underline any part that needed war mth, to
indicate that I should smile. Y es, it r eally work ed—people
actually told me I seemed wonderfully at ease, ﬂuid,
spontaneous, and natural.
You can try out a lot of these tips in low-stak es situations,
for instance, during a par ent-teacher association, service
club, or homeowners’ meeting. L et’s say you’r e at your ne xt
PTA meeting. Y ou’ve always thought it would be nice if the
school’s fading hallway could be r epainted. Y ou’re going to
get a few minutes to pr esent your case, and you need to
keep everyone focused on what you’r e going to say . Since
this issue is r eally not a big deal for you one way or the
other, this would be a good time to try out the techniques
you’ve just lear ned: voice ﬂuctuation, strategic pauses, and
intonation dr ops to mak e your message compelling.
Midcourse Corrections
Imagine that you’r e in the middle of a pr esentation, and you
suddenly mak e a mistak e. You stutter, you say the wr ong
thing, you miss a point, or your mind simply goes blank.
If you let your inter nal critic tak e over and start berating
you for this, you risk launching your ﬁght- or-ﬂight r esponse.
Your body would shut down “unnecessary” functions such as
your brain’s ability to think rationally—pr obably the last
thing you’d want in that particular situation.
So what to do?
If you’ve luckily noticed the critical thoughts befor e the
corresponding emotions fully blossomed, aim for a quick

--- PAGE 236 ---
perspective shif t (rewriting your r eality). Just considering,
even for a second, the mistak e you made as a good  thing
can be enough to stop the ﬁght- or-ﬂight r esponse in its
tracks. Because the brain’s ﬁrst r eaction to new concepts is
to accept them as valid, in the e xtra second it tak es
disbelief to arise, you will alr eady have moved on with
renewed conﬁdence.
You can tell yourself, for instance, that business moguls
and entertainers mak e mistak es purposefully to mak e
themselves mor e relatable to the audience. Sam W alton
(the founder of W almart) would dr op his notes on his way to
the lecter n. Frank Sinatra would car efully mess up his shirt
collar befor e stepping on stage. Y ou’re in good company .
If the negative emotions have alr eady arisen, you’r e going
to need to ﬂood your body with o xytocin to tur n oﬀ the ﬁght-
or-ﬂight r esponse. T o do this, follow the instructions below :
Putting It into Practice:  
Midcourse Corrections
♦ Check your body . Mak e sur e that no tense postur e is
worsening your inter nal state.
♦ Take a deep br eath and r elax your body .
♦ Destigmatize and dedramatize. R emember that this
happens to everyone, and it will pass.
♦ If any negative thoughts ar e present, r emember that
they’r e just thoughts, and not necessarily valid.
♦ Find little things to be grateful for : your ability to
breathe, the fact that you will still be alive by the end
of this.

--- PAGE 237 ---
♦ Imagine getting a gr eat hug fr om someone you trust
for twenty seconds (of course, you may not have
twenty seconds, but if you do, this is r emark ably
eﬀective).
Once your thr eat response is quieted down, to bring
yourself back into a state of conﬁdence r emember a
moment in your life when you felt absolute triumph.
Thanks to your brain’s inability to distinguish
imagination fr om reality, your body will be ﬁlled with the
same cocktail of chemicals (yes, we’r e helping you play
chemist with your brain) as it was during that
conﬁdence-ﬁlled moment, ther eby changing your body
language into e xactly what you need to be impr essive,
persuasive, and inspiring again.
Though this may seem lik e a lot of steps, the whole
sequence can happen in less than two seconds. W ith
practice, this becomes so natural, it happens at lightning
speed and you’r e back in gr ounded conﬁdence within
seconds. The human mind is astonishingly quick and agile.
Practice this pr ocess with little crises as of ten as possible,
so that when a big crisis hits, it’s second natur e. Use the go -
to visualization you developed in Chapter 5 .
You could practice this during meetings. Imagine that
you’r e not completely happy with an answer you gave and
your inner critic is acting up. While the r est of the gr oup
converses, run thr ough this midcourse cor rection befor e you
speak up again.
Speech Da y: Getting into the Zone
The single most important guideline for a successful speech
is simple: mak e it about them, not about you. As soon as
you start wor rying about yourself—wondering how you’r e

--- PAGE 238 ---
doing, or if this or that sentence was good enough—self -
criticism can easily arise. If, instead, you can mak e it all
about your audience—wondering how they’r e doing—you
take the focus oﬀ yourself, lif t your self -consciousness, and
get into a state of goodwill, which will be r ead and
appreciated by the audience.
Use any of the tools you lear ned in chapters 4  and
chapters 5  either to get yourself into this state of goodwill
and stay ther e or to get back ther e whenever you need to .
Putting It into Practice:  
Speech Da y Checklist
♦ Arrive early if you can; walk the stage to visualize
and own the stage.
♦ Go into a quiet r oom nearby, and use inter nal tools
such as visualization to get into a state of conﬁdence
and war mth.
♦ Pause befor e you start. Count thr ee beats, facing the
audience, befor e you begin to speak.
♦ During the pr esentation, expect  things to go wr ong—
whether an e xternal disruption or your ﬂubbing
something.
♦ Use the midcourse cor rections tools you’ve just
learned. T ake it with humanity and invite the audience
into this mistak e as a shar ed jok e.
♦ Thr oughout your speech, r emember to pause,
breathe, and slow down.
♦ Don’t run oﬀ stage; pause af ter your last wor ds.

--- PAGE 239 ---
KEY T AKEA WAYS
 Your pr esentation should have one main, simple, crystal-
clear message, supported by thr ee to ﬁve k ey points.
 Support each point with an entertaining story, inter esting
statistic, concr ete e xample, or vivid metaphor .
 Make your pr esentation short and entertaining. W atch the
value of each sentence.
 Arrive early if you can; walk the stage to visualize and own
it.
 Use a wide, well-balanced stance and tak e up as much
space as possible on stage. Limit superﬂuous gestur es
that distract the audience’s attention.
 Speak as if you’r e sharing a secr et with the audience,
telling them something special and conﬁdential.
 Use smiles and ﬂuctuation to war m your voice.
 Keep eye contact for one to two seconds per person.
 Pause fr equently and deliberately to show conﬁdence and
add drama as well as give yourself a chance to br eathe.
* Above four, we must engage diﬀer ent, slower brain pr ocesses. It tak es us mor e
time to r emember the items, and we do not r emember them as accurately .
Assessments of one to four items ar e rapid, accurate, and conﬁdent thr ough a
process called subitizing . As the number of items incr eases beyond this amount,
judgments ar e made with decr easing accuracy and conﬁdence. In addition,
response times rise in a dramatic fashion.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 240 ---
1 2
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 241 ---
Charisma in a Crisis
CHARISMA IS P ARTICUL ARLY eﬀective during times of uncertainty,
ambiguity, or crisis. “ Leaders per ceived as charismatic ar e
rated higher when times ar e tough and anxiety is high,”
Omar Sultan Haque of Harvar d’s department of psychology
told me.
It’s easier to be per ceived as charismatic during a crisis
because people facing an emer gency ar e mor e readily
aﬀected by a leader’s magnetism; 1 they become “charisma
hungry .” Whether it was Chur chill’s ability to r ouse
England’s spirits and inspir e her people to stand while the
rest of Eur ope fell, Napoleon taking F rance by stor m as it
was r eeling fr om the F rench R evolution, or Gandhi voicing a
clear path during India’s identity crisis, people who r espond
to crisis with bold, decisive actions will be per ceived as
charismatic.
If you ﬁnd yourself in a crisis, it’s actually an opportunity
to gain charisma— if you play your car ds right. This chapter
will show you how .
First, retain at least a certain measure of
equanimity . Most charismatic leaders ar e known for their
ability to r emain (or appear) calm even in the midst of
turbulent cir cumstances. As you know, anxiety impacts how
you feel, how you perfor m, and how others per ceive you
and r eact to you. It’s of ten immediately visible in your body
language.
As a leader, your body language alr eady has a ripple
eﬀect thr ough the company in nor mal times. This eﬀect is
only magniﬁed in times of crisis, because crises put leaders
in the spotlight, with people anxiously watching their every
move. Str ess systems go on constant, low-grade alert;

--- PAGE 242 ---
primal brains tak e over, leading people to r eact to your body
language far mor e than to your wor ds. Your body language
will have an even gr eater emotional contagion eﬀect than
usual. It becomes critical for you to maintain the right
internal state so that you can br oadcast the right body
language. T o keep cool, use all the inter nal tools—this is
wher e they r eally shine. I particularly r ecommend the
following techniques:
Check your physiology of ten, both for your own sak e (it
aﬀects your psychology) and for that of others (it will be
“caught” by them and will spr ead).
Skillfully handle inter nal negativity : destigmatize,
dedramatize, and neutralize the negative per ceptions
that may be cr owding your mind.
Rewrite r eality to whatever degr ee is helpful. T o get out
of a pessimistic state, ﬁnd a few diﬀer ent ways of
viewing the situation positively .
Use visualizations to k eep yourself in the right state. F or
instance, a r esponsibility transfer could be useful for
reducing anxiety .
Refer as of ten as necessary to the midcourse cor rections
checklist found on page 198, which walks you thr ough
handling critical moments step by step. P ractice this with
little crises as of ten as possible, so that when a big crisis
hits, this ﬂow is second natur e.
Second, express high expectations . Sometimes,
simply assigning to people the labels you want them to live
up to is enough. A fter hearing that they wer e consider ed
charitable, New Haven housewives gave far mor e money to
a canvasser fr om the Multiple Scler osis Association than
they ever had befor e.2 The mer e knowledge that they wer e
viewed as charitable caused these women to mak e their
actions consistent with others’ per ception of them.

--- PAGE 243 ---
After analyzing mor e than thr ee dozen studies of
charismatic leadership, Wharton School pr ofessor R obert
House concluded that “e xpressing high perfor mance
expectations” of people while “communicating a high
degree of conﬁdence” in their ability to meet those
expectations was the hallmark of charismatic leadership.
Think of the people you want your charisma to impact.
What standar d would you lik e them to live up to or e xceed?
Express this e xpectation as if you have full conﬁdence that
they can live up to it. Better yet, act lik e you assume they
already ar e meeting these standar ds.
Third, articulate a vision.  A charismatic vision is what
will give your charisma staying power when the crisis is
over. Think of Nelson Mandela, whose vision of unity and
moder nism for South A frica was so powerful that even af ter
the crisis of apartheid had passed and his service as
president was over, he continued to be seen as a
transnational leader for all of souther n Africa and an
inﬂuential voice in inter national politics.
On the other hand, P resident Geor ge H. W. Bush, who had
enjoyed 90 per cent appr oval ratings during the Gulf W ar,
was voted out of oﬃce the very ne xt year . His charisma had
soared during the crisis, but he had (in his own wor ds)
neglected “the vision thing.”
To be charismatic, your vision must vividly illustrate the
diﬀer ence between the way things ar e now and the way
they could be. Charismatic leaders of ten point out
deﬁciencies in the status quo, contrast this pictur e to a
glorious futur e, and show how they intend to get ther e.
Though this might sound comple x, it’s something many of
us do alr eady. Even salespeople seek the deﬁciency in their
potential clients’ pr esent condition (which will be r emedied,
of course, thr ough the pur chase of their goods or services).
Having a vision isn’t enough; you also must be able to
communicate it. Use the tools you lear ned in the previous

--- PAGE 244 ---
chapter  to craf t a message and deliver it in the most
charismatic way .
Once you have expressed your vision, be bold and
decisive.
By the winter of 1815, Napoleon, defeated and humiliated
by the F rench R oyal Ar my, had been condemned to a life of
exile on the island of Elba. The man who had risen fr om
humble beginnings to lead the F rench ar my and cr own
himself emper or of F rance was now alive only because his
attempt at suicide failed. In the last few days of F ebruary,
he escaped the island and landed on the shor es of F rance
with nothing. He had neither power nor money, and had last
been seen in a humiliating defeat.
And yet the sheer for ce of his visionary charisma dr ew
people to him once again. He conveyed complete
conﬁdence in his ability to sweep thr ough the country and
regain power . He gave people a compelling vision of a
country fr ee from the long-hated ruling class.
He had nothing but a vision and charisma, yet that was
enough. The unthink able was happening: with no money to
pay soldiers’ wages, without even enough food to feed
them, Napoleon was somehow gathering tr oops and
proclaiming his intention to r eclaim the thr one.
The F rench court was incensed. Marshal Ney was ask ed to
lead the char ge to quash the ruﬃan once and for all. On the
day of his departur e, Ney made a public commitment to the
whole court that he would “bring back the usurper in a
cage.” He then set oﬀ fr om P aris, mar ching at the head of
the royal ar mies even as Napoleon was leading his much
smaller band of men to meet him. On the mor ning of Mar ch
7, the two ar mies met at dawn.
On one side stood the massive F rench r egiment; on the
other, Napoleon’s scrawny ar my. Napoleon emer ged, alone.
He cr ossed the divide, and when he was within gunshot
range, he planted himself in fr ont of the opposing tr oops—

--- PAGE 245 ---
the same ar my that he had once led. And he shouted: “ Here
I am. Do you want to kill your emper or? Go ahead.”
The soldiers, over come with emotion, r esponded with
cries of “ Long live the emper or!” and cr ossed the divide to
stand by his side. Ney himself abjur ed his mission and
joined Napoleon, and they all followed as he mar ched upon
Paris to r eclaim the thr one.
Studies consistently show that in times of crisis, people
instinctively tur n to individuals who ar e bold, conﬁdent, and
decisive. Crisis cr eates uncertainty, which cr eates angst,
and people will cling to whatever they feel diminishes this
angst. This is why faith, vision, and authority have such
power in times of crisis.
KEY T AKEA WAYS
 Charisma is particularly eﬀective in crisis situations.
 Stay in a calm, conﬁdent inter nal state so that your
emotional contagion eﬀect is positive.
 Expr ess high e xpectations of people, and communicate
your complete conﬁdence in their ability to rise to the
occasion.
 Articulate a bold vision, show your conﬁdence in your
ability to r ealize that vision, and act decisively to achieve
it.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 246 ---
1 3
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 247 ---
The Charismatic Life
Rising to the Challenge
WHEN THEY HEAR  what I do for a living, people of ten ask if I
spend most of my time with brilliant ner ds. I r espond with,
“Actually, many of my clients ar e highly successful, highly
charismatic e xecutives who come to me not just to raise
their charisma level but to lear n how to handle its
consequences.” That, generally, is when they give me a
blank look.
Yes, it’s gr eat to have charisma. And yes, it will mak e you
more inﬂuential, mor e persuasive, and mor e inspiring.
People will lik e you, trust you, and want to be led by you.
But charisma does have its downsides. All for ms of charisma
come at a cost; what the cost is depends on the charisma
style you choose. In this ﬁnal chapter you will lear n a few
potential side eﬀects of charisma and how to best handle
them.
You Become a Magnet for Praise  
as W ell as Envy
As you become incr easingly magnetic, you may ﬁnd
yourself attracting praise, admiration, and envy . When the
team succeeds, cr edit will naturally ﬂow to you. It’s your
name the higher -ups r emember, your contribution, and your
face they put on the success. And that’s all gr eat. Until, that
is, others start r esenting you for it. A t best, their envy will
make them feel alienated. A t worst, they will try to sabotage
you.
You’re going to have to compensate for your charisma in
order to limit the jealousy and r esentment others may feel.

--- PAGE 248 ---
You have thr ee choices: you can r efuse the glory, r eﬂect the
glory, or transfer the glory .
Refusing the glory means trying to self -eﬀace—to
minimize the praise you’r e getting. Y ou can try to bring
yourself back down thr ough self -depr ecation, downplaying
compliments and praise. But we’ve seen how this can
backﬁr e, as you’r e essentially contradicting your admir ers
and making them feel wr ong.
Reﬂecting the glory means highlighting others’
contributions. This works well, and has the additional bonus
of making you look modest. Something as simple as
“Thanks! W e wer e really luck y to have Susan checking the
ﬁnancials and Bill doing his graphic magic.” But sometimes,
no matter how much you r eﬂect, some people will still
become envious or r esentful of your magnetism and your
success. Y ou may need to go a step further, which is to
transfer the glory .
The CEO of a lar ge multinational bank had ask ed me to
coach his entir e executive team. Nancy, one of the senior
executives, was a highly charismatic rising star running the
bank’s southwest r egion. In fact, she was so successful that
the CEO ask ed one of Nancy’s peers—K evin, a veteran with
the bank—to send his team to lear n how Nancy ran her
group and adopt her best practices. A ccordingly, K evin’s
team ar rived for a one-week visit to Nancy’s headquarters.
Nancy was honor ed, delighted, and deter mined to do a
great job. Until, that is, she lear ned fr om one of her visitors
that K evin had been bad-mouthing her to his team ever
since the CEO’s r equest came in.
“How should I handle this?” she ask ed me. I ask ed Nancy
to put herself in K evin’s position and r eally try to e xperience
the situation as he might be living it right now . “Imagine
that you’r e a veteran with the bank. And you’ve been told to
send your team to go lear n from a young whippersnapper
with ten years’ less e xperience than you. How would that
make you feel?”

--- PAGE 249 ---
Perhaps K evin felt that he was no longer seen as
successful, or at least not as successful as this less
experienced “upstart.” He might well have been feeling
insecur e, no longer admir ed or r espected, and he might
have been focusing these negative feelings on Nancy’s
success in the for m of r esentment.
I told Nancy that the only way her success wouldn’t mak e
him feel envious or r esentful was if he could see it as his
success, too . I encouraged her to give K evin this sense of
ownership by ﬁnding some way he might have participated
in her success. I ask ed Nancy to think of something she
might have lear ned fr om him, or some way in which he
could have inspir ed her . “Oh, for heaven’s sak e. Do I have
to?” she grumbled. “It would r eally be worth it,” I answer ed.
It took Nancy a couple of minutes, but she eventually did
come up with something: “W ell, ther e was this one time in
the management meeting wher e Alan started complaining
about how cumbersome the new systems wer e. Kevin found
a great, upbeat way of encouraging Alan to accept that as a
known parameter and move on. The way he phrased it was
just the right tone of humor ous chiding. I’ll go with that.”
I also r eminded Nancy of the Ben F ranklin Eﬀect. She
could periodically ask K evin for his thoughts and opinions to
show him that she values his opinion, helping him to feel
respected again. She could then go back to him later to tell
him the impact of these thoughts or opinions.
Giving people a sense of ownership for your success is a
great way to pr event r esentment and engender good
feelings, such as pride and loyalty, instead. This technique
is, in fact, known as a Clinton classic. During his tenur e in
the White House, Bill Clinton was known to go ar ound asking
everyone, fr om his chef to his janitor, for their opinion on
foreign policy . He’d listen intently, and in subsequent
conversations would r efer back to the opinion they’d
oﬀered. When people feel that they’ve had a hand in
“making” you, they feel a certain ownership of and

--- PAGE 250 ---
identiﬁcation with you, and ther efore a certain r esponsibility
for your success.
As you become incr easingly successful and visible, it
might be worth r egularly launching a brief envy -prevention
campaign. W arning: you must  be sincer e in whatever it is
you choose to say . One of my clients, when lear ning the
following sequence, e xclaimed: “ Great! A shortcut! F rom
now on, I can give people the feeling I car e about them
without actually liking them in the least, right?” W rong. F irst,
as you now know, the vast majority of the time, if you don’t
mean what you say, people will intuitively know . They’ll feel
it on a gut level. Second, e xpressing something we don’t
believe leads to cognitive dissonance, which uses up our
focus, diverts our attention, and thus impairs our
perfor mance. Insincerity just isn’t worth the toll it tak es.
With this said, think of a dozen people who could matter
to your car eer. Then r each out to them by phone or e-mail
with the following envy -prevention technique:
Justiﬁcation.  Create an e xcuse for contacting the
person; it can’t seem completely out of the blue: “I was
talking to Sue and your name came up” or “ Bob made
me think of you and that time when…” When I’m
coaching clients, I tell them to use our session as a
justiﬁcation. A fter all, I have indeed ask ed them to think
of the people who matter to their car eer, so they can
truthfully say, “I was working with my e xecutive coach,
and your name came up.”
Appreciation.  Thank the person for what they’ve done
for you. Y ou can thank someone for taking time to meet
you, whether in person or by phone, especially if you
spoke with them for the ﬁrst time or for a long time. Y ou

--- PAGE 251 ---
can also acknowledge good advice or inter esting
information someone gave you.
Lay it all out.  Demonstrate e xactly how the person
helped you. A cknowledge their eﬀort: “I know you didn’t
have to do…” or “I know you went out of your way to
do…”
Impact.  Let them know the positive impact they’ve had
on you. What did they do or say or what e xample did
they set that changed you for the better? What do you
do or say diﬀer ently because of what they did or said or
because of the e xample they set for you? How is your
life or your behavior diﬀer ent? T ell them the diﬀer ence it
made to you personally; mak e it dramatic. P eople love
to feel important.
Responsibility . The Justiﬁcation- Appreciation-Laying-
out-the-Impact sequence cr eates a feeling of
Responsibility (J ALIR). It gives people a feeling of vested
interest in your success. Give them as much cr edit as
you can. Mak e them feel that they own your success
and they will feel driven to help you continue to
succeed.
Envy and r esentment ar e challenges mostly e xperienced
by individuals with “high power ” styles of charisma, such as
authority and visionary . So if you want to emanate those
styles, it’s worth doing the J ALIR sequence r egularly . Once a
month put a r eminder in your calendar to pick people to
give the J ALIR sequence to, or to ask for their opinions, or to
follow up on those opinions and show the impact they had.
Here’s a J ALIR e-mail that a client of mine r ecently sent
out:
Dan—

--- PAGE 252 ---
I was just thinking about you the other day when
someone ask ed me who wer e the people who’d had an
impact on my car eer. I don’t know if I ever mentioned
how much I lear ned fr om working with you on the
ﬁnance pr oject. I’ll always r emember the way you
handled that one hostile phone call—how calm you
remained thr oughout. It taught me one could stay even-
keeled no matter what the client was saying. These
days, when I feel I’m losing patience on a call, I of ten
remind myself, “ Hey, r emember how Dan handled that
hostile call?”
Oh, and the advice you gave me on strategic pricing?
I’ve been following it ever since. In fact, it played a k ey
role in the success of the department’s lar gest pr oposal
this year .
All in all, I guess I just want to say thanks. Though you
may not r ealize it, you had a big impact on me, so
please tak e some cr edit for whatever success you see
me have!
Best,
Jim
People Can Reveal T oo Much
When I ﬁrst started coaching business e xecutives, I
deliver ed value just by impr oving their communication skills.
These wer e practical, tar geted tools and techniques that
they could practice, ﬁne-tune, and mak e their own. During
the pr ocess, a str ong intellectual connection would for m
between us. This was comfortable for all involved and made
the coaching pr ocess r ewar ding as well as highly successful.
But gradually, as I started e xperimenting with the inter nal
skills you lear ned in the pr evious chapters, I found that in
addition to the intellectual connection, a str ong emotional
connection would for m during coaching sessions.

--- PAGE 253 ---
Sometimes, the emotional connection and the intellectual
connection would combine into one superstr ong connection.
As one client described it, it was as if I wer e creating a for ce
ﬁeld ar ound us, a cocoon, a container within which magic
would of ten happen. And that’s when I started to notice a
strange phenomenon.
In the moment, the e xperience would feel magical, a r eal
“high” for both my clients and myself . They’d do
extraor dinarily deep work, gaining pr ofound insights and
revelatory epiphanies. I’d of ten be surprised by how much
they would r eveal but thrilled that they pr ogressed so much
further than either of us had e xpected.
And yet r epeatedly, the very clients who’d spontaneously
shared such personal r evelations and e xpressed their awe
and wonder in gaining such insights would then disappear
from the face of the earth. I couldn’t understand why .
Having r eached such e xtraor dinary depth and having made
so much pr ogress in just one session, I imagined they’d be
eager to r eturn. It wasn’t until I described this situation to a
veteran e xecutive coach that I understood wher e my er ror
lay.
My fellow coach, Eli, was a for mer Israeli Ar my oﬃcer with
decades of e xperience. “ Of course they disappear,” he told
me. “They’r e recoiling in shame. During the session, you
created such a str ong for ce ﬁeld that it does feel lik e magic
to them, and they’r e on a high—almost inebriated. In that
altered state, they shar e much mor e than they nor mally
would and go much further than they would if ‘sober .’ ”
My heart sank as I r ealized how well his e xplanation ﬁt. Eli
continued: “ A few hours later, or the ne xt mor ning, as they
come out of the trance, their ego wak es up, r ealizes how
much they shar ed, how far they went, and moans, ‘Oh, what
have you done?’ ”
He related this to the e xperience of waking up the
morning af ter a night of debauchery with the hor riﬁed
shame of r ealizing what you’ve done under the inﬂuence.

--- PAGE 254 ---
And he concluded, “Never tak e people deeper than they’r e
ready to go . It’s your job to not give in to the high, to not let
them r eveal mor e than they’r e ready for .”
Over the years I’ve r ealized that this feeling of a safe
cocoon can have other side eﬀects. Sometimes, without
realizing it, as people feel so safe and str ong, they’ll ventur e
too close to their own demons, ones that they’r e not r eady
to face. This challenge is one of the few downsides that can
accompany kindness or focus charisma.
I remember one e xtraor dinary session wher e I led my
client fr om epiphany to epiphany . Oh, it was a high. He saw
so much of his potential, so much of himself, he told me the
scales had fallen fr om his eyes. He said he felt lif ted,
renewed, and r eborn. I thought this was quite a triumph,
gave him a few guidelines, and sent him on his way .
I didn’t hear fr om him for a month. I was a bit concer ned,
but assumed he was focusing on his “homework.” When he
ﬁnally called, he told me what had happened: “Y ou can’t
imagine the impact, the eﬀect, that half hour with you had. I
holed up in my apartment for a week. F or a week it
absorbed my whole world. T urned it upside down.”
Yes, he had emer ged, and, lik e a phoenix rising fr om the
ashes, his steady ascent thr ough the company since that
week is something he thanks me for to this day . But we
were luck y. I’d unknowingly walk ed him right into the
deepest waters, and wasn’t holding his hand as I lef t him to
ﬁgure out how to sink or swim.
In the years since, under the guidance of wiser mentors,
I’ve lear ned not to give in to the magical feeling that
charisma can cr eate and to put the brak es on so that my
clients’ comfort builds gradually, over a number of sessions.
It’s not easy, however, to slow people down when they’r e
in the middle of this kind of e xperience without leaving
them feeling hurt and r ejected. Her e are a few “sof t
landing” appr oaches to try :

--- PAGE 255 ---
1. Pay attention. When they start sharing, ask yourself : Will
they r egret having said this tomor row?
2. As soon as you hear them start to say something you
think they may r egret, interject a “me, too ” story . This is
the one case wher e inter ruption is war ranted. Ideally,
this would be something you’ve personally e xperienced,
second best would be something that someone close to
you has e xperienced, and thir d best would be
something you’ve hear d about. The “me, too ”
interjection accomplishes thr ee things:
First, this for ces them to pause, inter rupts their ﬂow,
and gives them a chance to slow down the str eam of
personal r evelations.
Second, they get to hear something similar to what
they’ve just shar ed told by someone else, and with this
switching of r oles, a chance to hear how r evelatory their
own sharing was. They can then decide whether they
feel comfortable continuing on that path.
Last, this will help them when they come oﬀ the high. If
their ego r ecoils in shame over having shar ed too much,
they can cling to the fact that the person they shar ed so
much with r evealed something similar .
3. If it’s too late and they’ve alr eady gone too far, show
them that you ar e placing their r evelations in the whole-
scope conte xt of all you know about them—that
whatever they ar e revealing is just one piece of a much
bigger pictur e that contains many elements they can be
proud of . Say something lik e, “W ow, I never would have
guessed you had such a str ong impostor syndr ome, too,
considering all your accomplishments.”
4. You can also aim to mak e them feel admir ed for having
shared and r evealed so much. R emember, what you’r e
trying to counteract is shame, and few things work

--- PAGE 256 ---
better for this than admiration. F or example: “Y ou’re
showing some serious courage to be delving so deep.
That’s impr essive.”
Let’s say you’r e meeting a client for the ﬁrst time. The
meeting starts oﬀ gr eat—the client clearly lik es you, and
you tur n on your focus or kindness charisma full blast. Y ou
can feel the comfort gr owing, and the client incr easingly
reveals his plans for the company and e xplains wher e he’d
most lik e your help. So far, so good—very good.
But as the meeting pr ogresses and the comfort level
keeps gr owing, the client tells you how amazing it is that he
feels so at ease with you. He starts r evealing mor e about his
own personal thoughts and views about how his company is
doing, how he’s doing, what his hopes and dr eams and fears
are—even his insecurities.
Your job is to listen attentively to each sentence and,
using one of the techniques above, aim to br eak the ﬂow
when you think the potential backlash for these r evelations
would be too damaging.
When you tur n on your charisma full blast, you cr eate a
kind of r eality distortion ﬁeld ar ound you. It’s a bit lik e
hypnosis; people can go into an alter ed state in your
presence. And just as a hypnotist must tak e car e when
leading people out of a trance, so must you. Y ou’re putting
them under the spell of your pr esence, so help them ease
out of the alter ed state as well.
You’re in the Spotlight and  
Held to Higher Standards
Celebrities and CEOs have at least one thing in common:
they’r e always on display . Whether they know it or not,
whether they lik e it or not, they’r e almost always under
scrutiny . This is another possible side eﬀect of high-power
charisma styles such as authority and visionary .

--- PAGE 257 ---
Business book author Marshall Goldsmith told me that
many CEOs wor ry about the pr essur e to always be on their
best behavior . “For them, it’s always ‘showtime.’ They have
to demonstrate charisma even when listening to the most
tedious P owerP oint pr esentation, because everyone in the
room is looking at them, as well as (or even mor e than) at
the pr esenter .”
Because charismatic people seem endowed with e xtra
powers, we e xpect mor e of them than we do of others. W e
expect gr eater r esults and will not be content, much less
impressed, with good but not e xtraor dinary perfor mance.
If their perfor mance is poor, the criticism can be much
more sever e than it would be for an “average person.”
When ask ed what becomes of the failed charismatics in the
world of business, Harvar d professor R akesh Khurana says:
“We do what we’ve always done to our failed messiahs: we
crucif y them.”
J. R. Wurster, the CEO of a small L os Angeles–based ﬁlm
company, gives oﬀ such a laid-back vibe that he’s the last
person I’d have e xpected to feel pr essur ed by the spotlight.
And yet when I mentioned this issue, he knew e xactly what I
meant: “This pr essur e to always overperfor m can r eally bur n
out charismatic people. W e no longer allow ourselves to be
human, and no one can live lik e that.”
The answer? Allow yourself to be human. This means both
accepting  humanity and showing  your humanity . Which
means both accepting vulnerability and (gasp!) showing
vulnerability . I know, I know, even just considering this may
feel highly uncomfortable. And yet I pr omise it’s worth it.
Hayes Bar nard (the charismatic CEO of P aramount Equity)
told me that “e xecutives who ar e very transpar ent and
vulnerable ar e very charismatic.” R emember F rank Sinatra
and Sam W alton playing up their ﬂaws befor e facing an
audience.
The idea that drawing attention to your vulnerabilities
would ultimately enhance your power may seem

--- PAGE 258 ---
counterintuitive. But showing vulnerability and humanity
makes you mor e relatable and helps to avoid the feeling of
alienation, which is a r eal risk when your charisma gives you
a touch of the super human. If Super man didn’t have the
foibles of Clark K ent to humanize him, he would be much
less lik able. It would be impossible to r elate to him.
When Michael Jor dan moved fr om bask etball to baseball,
his popularity r emained sk y-high despite his pitiful
perfor mance. R eporters noted that most people, in fact,
related even mor e personally to Jor dan the baseball player,
in part because he seemed less super human and mor e like
one of them. Jor dan himself said that baseball gave him a
more humanistic side.
This is equally true in business. W e need to be able to
relate to our charismatic business leaders. Studies have
shown that the per ceived similarity between follower and
leader is a k ey element in charismatic leadership, and that
showing your vulnerabilities can give others something to
relate to, something they feel you shar e in common. 1 In
addition, as people get accustomed to seeing your human
side, you’ll be r elieved of some of the e xpectations of
always being “ on.”
The conscious decision to show vulnerability was a critical
turning point in Bill Clinton’s car eer. Just ﬁve months befor e
the 1992 pr esidential election, Clinton’s poll ratings wer e
dismal, lagging well behind both Geor ge H. W. Bush and
Ross P erot. Political commentators wer e so convinced of his
upcoming humiliation in the election that they declar ed him
“irrelevant.” R ealizing that voters wer en’t feeling a sense of
connection with him, Clinton’s advisers suggested a
surprising move: rather than try to impr ess with his
strengths, he should try to build rapport with his
vulnerabilities.
Clinton’s team launched an all- out vulnerability campaign
they code-named “The Manhattan P roject,” booking him on
talk shows to r eveal his tr oubled childhood and diﬃcult

--- PAGE 259 ---
family situations. Despite the Bush team calling this move
“weird” and even downright “wack y,” the Clinton team
persever ed, and within just one month  his appr oval ratings
soared from 33 to 77 per cent. The r est, of course, is history .
You’ll want to be selective in choosing with whom, how,
and in which conte xt to show your humanity . Choose your
setting well, and don’t attempt vulnerability for the ﬁrst
time in a high-stak es moment. Instead, practice when the
stakes ar e low .
Putting It into Practice:  
Showing V ulnerability
Think of the ne xt thr ee or four conversations you’r e
going to have. P ick one or two that have low stak es.
Now ﬁnd a small vulnerability you could shar e. This
should not be something major . Any minor fear,
hesitation, concer n, or r egret will do . You might shar e
something you’r e wor ried about, something you think
you did wr ong, or something you wish you could have
done better .
Befor e the conversation, do a compassion
visualization and a r esponsibility transfer for the
outcome of this e xercise. This gets your body language
right and pr events anxiety fr om overwhelming you,
though you should expect  discomfort—that’s what
vulnerability is all about.
During the conversation, her e are a few good ways to
ease into the sharing:
♦ “You know, I have to tell you…” or “I have to admit…”
are good pr eambles.
♦ Prepare the ter rain by saying “I’m feeling a bit
nervous about saying this, but…”

--- PAGE 260 ---
♦ You can also ask them to k eep this conversation
conﬁdential. Not only will this mak e you feel safer, it
will mak e people tr easur e the moment mor e. People
love secr ets.
Do another quick r esponsibility transfer immediately
after revealing the vulnerability . This helps your brain
get comfortable with e xpressing vulnerabilities by
linking to the pr ocess the good feelings that a transfer
of responsibility of ten brings.
As with the advanced delving into discomfort e xercise,
vulnerability can be highly uncomfortable. But you now
have all the tools you need to handle this discomfort, and
it’s worth doing, because you’ll gain a wonderful skill. Y ou
may notice alr eady how very “alive” vulnerability can mak e
you feel. It can also mak e you feel very connected to others.
If you want to r eﬁne your practice of vulnerability, pay
attention to the following: it’s not just what you say and
what you shar e but also how you feel  while you’r e sharing.
Some people manage to disclose highly personal, intimate,
vulnerable infor mation but don’t feel a thing while doing so .
It’s as if they k eep themselves at a distance fr om the
vulnerability . They lay out the facts as they would a math
problem and they k eep their hearts well shielded behind a
wall.
As your skills incr ease, try actually feeling a little
vulnerability when you shar e a small disclosur e. If you can
manage this, your body language will be much mor e
eﬀective. A small dose of vulnerability is all you need to
project it successfully, and the self -compassion tools fr om
Chapter 5  will mak e the overall e xperience much easier .
It’s Lonely at the T op

--- PAGE 261 ---
As you ar e seen incr easingly as a “star,” even those who
want to lik e you may ﬁnd it har d to r elate to you. In
addition, you may feel incr easingly separated fr om them.
When people start to put you on a pedestal and to see you
as special, diﬀer ent, or super human, you might end up
feeling isolated.
This, actually, is one of the r easons why CEOs and senior
executives fr equently r each out to me. They have charisma
already, but they need the checks and balances, the trusted
advice and honest feedback that they no longer get fr om
others, or at least not as much as they would lik e. I’ve hear d
this most of ten fr om those whose main charisma style is
authority, and to a lesser degr ee from visionary and focus
charismatics.
When you’r e charismatic, you feel that you have gr eat
power and inﬂuence over people. It’s har d to see them as
peers, and it can be lonely to feel that you don’t have peers.
Sometimes It W orks When It Shouldn’t
Arthur is a good friend and a true alpha male who
broadcasts authority charisma everywher e he goes. In fact,
we wer e originally intr oduced by a mutual friend who knew I
was r esear ching charisma and told me, “Y ou have got to
meet this guy .” He was right.
Over the course of many weeks, Arthur was kind enough
to let me observe his alpha male charisma in action. W e
were sitting on the ter race of a r estaurant one day having
brunch—eggs Benedict for him, poached salmon for me.
Suddenly, he leaned over and told me: “Y ou know, charisma
can have side eﬀects.”
For Arthur, charisma’s gr eatest danger is that it gives you
the power to convince people even when you’r e completely
wrong. “I’ve r ealized that as long as I’m convinced that I’m
right, and str ongly car e about it, I can convince people of

--- PAGE 262 ---
anything . And I am no mor e likely to be right than they ar e,
frankly . It’s just that when I combine logical ar guments with
emotion, passion, and charisma, it suddenly just feels right
for everyone to do what I say .”
Arthur told me that he’s lear ned to consciously r estrain his
charisma when he’s with his own team. He tries to set up
guardrails to pr event it fr om overpowering worthwhile
arguments. As he told me, “I’ve been noticing how
convincing I sound, how objective and fair I appear, when in
reality, as I r ealize later, I was neither . With gr eat power
comes gr eat responsibility . I second-guess my decisions now
much mor e than I used to .”
As you become incr easingly charismatic and things start
happening easily for you, ther e’s also a risk of assuming
that things happen just as easily and smoothly for other
people. T ry to r emember that this isn’t the case; others
don’t all have your new charismatic powers.
Being seen as super human can also impact your entir e
organization as people start to r ely on your special qualities
and begin to assume that things will always tur n out right.
On the one hand, they may feel that they no longer need to
work as har d; they may feel absolved of r esponsibility and
become complacent. On the other hand, they can also
become over conﬁdent, taking risks they wouldn’t otherwise
take, feeling that if anything goes wr ong, you’ll magically ﬁx
it.
Warning: Charisma Is a Power T ool; Use It
Responsibly
People of ten ask me whether the techniques they’r e
learning could have danger ous consequences. And of course
they could—this stuﬀ is powerful. Ther e is indeed a dark
side. Many of those who have studied charisma closely have
come to war n against it.

--- PAGE 263 ---
Until the 1980s, in fact, many highly inﬂuential leadership
think ers, such as P eter Druck er, vehemently opposed both
the study and the teaching of charisma. Druck er frequently
pointed out that the most charismatic leaders of the last
century wer e Hitler, Stalin, Mao, and Mussolini.
Charisma is powerful because it incr eases one’s ability to
inﬂuence others. Any training that heightens this ability has
the potential of being used in both helpful and har mful
ways. In its aim, charisma training is no diﬀer ent fr om any
other leadership skills training. Should we, then, discourage
all training in leadership eﬀectiveness?
Marshall Goldsmith told me that he sees charisma as an
asset lik e any other, just lik e intelligence: “If you’r e going in
the right dir ection, you’ll get ther e faster . In the wr ong
direction, charisma will also help you get ther e faster . It’s an
asset, not an insurance policy . Do many charismatic leaders
fail? Of course they do . Just lik e many very intelligent
leaders. That doesn’t mean that either charisma or
intelligence is wr ong.”
A knife can be used both to heal and to hurt. Whether in
the hands of a sur geon or the hands of a criminal it’s the
same instrument. T ools ar e seldom good or bad per se.
What you’ve gained thr oughout this book is an ar ray of tools
—you get to decide how to use them. It’s what you do with
your charisma that matters.
KEY T AKEA WAYS
 Charisma has a few possible downsides: you can become
the tar get of envy and r esentment, others can r eveal too
much during your interactions, you ar e held to a higher
standar d, it can be lonely at the top, and charisma may
work even when it shouldn’t.

--- PAGE 264 ---
 To mitigate envy and r esentment, r eﬂect or transfer praise
and glory . Highlight others who deserve praise and give
people ownership of your success.
 To stop people fr om oversharing, interject a “me, too ”
story, or help them destigmatize if it’s too late to do so .
 Showing vulnerability will mak e you mor e likable and mor e
relatable, and will pr event people fr om e xpecting you to
be super human, all-powerful, all-knowing, and always
right. Charisma is a powerful tool—use it r esponsibly .
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 265 ---
Conclusion
IF YOU HAD  met James in January 2005, you would have seen a
young man of medium height, slight build, and br own eyes
ﬂoating in his loose suit, oﬀ-white shirt, and br own shoes.
He might have walk ed up to you a bit hesitantly and given
you a rather limp handshak e. Thr oughout the conversation,
James would have spok en in a quiet, ﬂat voice, rar ely
maintaining eye contact for mor e than a second or two .
Uncomfortable with his own pr esence, he would have come
across as r eserved and distant, even when he was actually
truly inter ested.
James had everything going for him: he had a sharp mind,
deep insights, a lot of talent, and he work ed har d. With full
charisma, he would have been a powerful for ce within his
ﬁrm. As it was, James’s skills, dedication, and
accomplishments went unnoticed. He might have been
described as “ nice,” but he was completely for gettable.
When I ﬁrst met James, he did not mak e a good ﬁrst
impression. Despite his k een intelligence, he had no idea
how to own the space ar ound him. His gr eat technical skills
didn’t help him mak e his pr esence felt. Nor did he
understand the per ception that his questioning tone and
nervous nodding gave oﬀ. He came acr oss as shy, awkwar d,
and hesitant—the very opposite of a conﬁdent and
charismatic leader .
Those who’d work ed with him knew this wasn’t an
accurate r eﬂection of James’s worth. “ Listen, we know  he’s
got gr eat potential, a brilliant mind, and quite a bit of
expertise,” his boss told me. “ But somehow, he’s
consistently ignor ed in meetings, passed over for
promotions, and altogether overlook ed.” James was doing

--- PAGE 266 ---
outstanding work, yet he never r eceived the full r ecognition
he deserved. Why? The decidedly uncharismatic
impressions he made wer e always dogging his heels.
James was sk eptical about how much of a diﬀer ence
charisma training could mak e to his car eer. He was,
however, willing to give it one wholehearted attempt. In our
very ﬁrst session, we identiﬁed which charisma styles would
work best for him. James lear ned several power - and
warmth-enhancing visualizations that he could start using
immediately . He lear ned how to change his postur e to get a
conﬁdence-boosting cycle going. He lear ned how to “get
into his toes.” A fter just one session, the diﬀer ence was
striking. Alr eady he was walking diﬀer ently, holding himself
diﬀer ently, and pr ojecting far mor e conﬁdence. This was still
James, yet he car ried new str ength.
In the weeks that followed, we work ed on unleashing mor e
of his charisma potential as he gained both verbal and
nonverbal tools to incr ease his pr esence, power, and
warmth. James continued adjusting and impr oving his
postur e, voice, conversation, and pr esentation skills. He
could now tak e up space with his body language, ﬁnally
comfortable being the big gorilla. He could ﬂuctuate his
voice with war mth and power and he spok e with a richer,
more resonant tone.
Within just a few weeks of our working together, James
had achieved an astounding transfor mation. His peers
watched in awe and his superiors in amazement as their
colleague’s perfor mance rating soar ed. As one of them told
me later, it was “a complete metamorphosis.”
Three months af ter our coaching began, James r eﬂected
on how pr ofound this change had been: “The business star
you see today did not e xist ninety days ago .” Nowadays,
when James walks into a r oom, people notice . When he
speaks at meetings, people listen. And he wr ote me
recently : “These practices have now become second
natur e.”

--- PAGE 267 ---
Yet it’s obvious to me that the charismatic pr esence he
has now was always ther e, buried deep. It simply just took
the right insights and the right skills to get him to wher e he
is now, easily infusing his business dealings with mor e
personal magnetism. Just lik e a rough diamond needs
polishing to r eveal its brilliance, it took a little skill and
practice to bring James’s inner superstar to the surface.
Now you know what charisma is: behaviors that pr oject
presence, power, and war mth. Y ou know these behaviors
can be lear ned, and you’ve been given an entir e toolkit to
do so . You’ve been absorbing a host of new practices,
mindset shif ts, and ways of being. F rom her e onwar d, it’s
going to be a delicate balance between being true to your
natur e and str etching out of your traditional comfort zones.
As you practice them, these techniques will gradually
become a part of who you ar e rather than a set of skills
you’r e lear ning. R emember, it’s r eally a question of
accessing  diﬀer ent parts of you, lear ning to mor e fully
express qualities that you alr eady have. W e all have the
capacity for pr esence, power, and war mth.
Stretch the boundaries of your comfort zone in low-stak es
situations. On the other hand, when you’r e in high-stak es
situations, don’t tak e the risk of coming acr oss as
uncomfortable or inauthentic. While you’r e lear ning, in
diﬃcult or important situations, stick with the charismatic
behaviors and styles that ar e easiest for you.
You’re embarking on an e xpedition. Expect ups and
downs, detours, and obstacles along the way . But your
interactions will soon start to feel incr easingly positive,
sometimes even magical. R emember to enjoy  this
progression. Sit back and appr eciate how well the
interaction is going, how well you’r e doing. Drink it in.
Your life is about to change. Enjoy the jour ney.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 268 ---
Recommended Resources
Books
Brach, T ara. Radical A cceptance: Embracing Y our Life with
the Heart of a Buddha . New Y ork: Bantam, 2004. A gr eat
resour ce for emotional training; I’ve of ten called this one
“graduate school for the heart.”
Cialdini, R obert B. Inﬂuence: The P sychology of P ersuasion .
Rev. ed. New Y ork: Harper P aperbacks, 2006. Consider ed
the “bible” of inﬂuence, Cialdini’s book is r equir ed reading
in most MBA pr ograms.
Frankl, V iktor E. Man’s Sear ch for Meaning . Rev. ed. New
York: P ocket Books, 1997. A gr eat help in gaining
equanimity, this is a worthwhile r ead for anyone facing a
crisis. F ew books can give you perspective lik e this one
(and in so few pages).
Germer, Christopher K. The Mindful P ath to Self -Compassion .
New Y ork: Guilfor d Press, 2009. A gr eat resour ce if you’d
like to focus on self -compassion.
Haidt, Jonathan. The Happiness Hypothesis . New Y ork: Basic
Books, 2006. Best science I’ve found on the scientiﬁc
study of happiness. F ascinating.
Hayes, Steven C. Get Out of Y our Mind and Into Y our Life .
Oakland, CA : New Harbinger P ublications, 2005. The best
book I’ve found on how to handle your own mind.
Kabat-Zinn, Jon. Wher ever Y ou Go, Ther e You Ar e. 10th
anniv . ed. New Y ork: Hyperion, 2005. The best intr oduction
to mindfulness I’ve ever found. Just the intr oduction and
ﬁrst two chapters ar e all you need.
Stone, Douglas, Bruce P atton, Sheila Heen, and R oger F isher.
Diﬃcult Conversations: How to Discuss What Matters

--- PAGE 269 ---
Most.  New Y ork: P enguin Non-Classics, 2000. The best
framework I’ve found on diﬃcult conversations.
Stone, Hal, and Sidra Stone. Embracing Y our Inner Critic .
New Y ork: HarperOne, 1993. A gr eat ﬁrst start on getting
to know the inner critic, and an easy r ead.
Williams, Mark, John T easdale, Zindel Segal, and Jon K abat-
Zinn. The Mindful W ay thr ough Depr ession . New Y ork:
Guilfor d Press, 2007. The best of the best on this diﬃcult
topic. A must-r ead for anyone who has e xperienced
depression or whose loved ones have suﬀer ed from it. I
would also r ecommend it to anyone in a position of
leadership; you would be amazed at the pr oportion of
people in corporate America who e xperience depr ession.
Online Resources
Visit http://www .CharismaMyth.com  to access dozens of fr ee
articles pack ed with practical tools and tips. Y ou’ll ﬁnd lots
of free downloadable r esour ces, such as a PDF workbook,
audio r ecordings of all the visualization e xercises, and many
more resour ces to help you get the most out of this book.
Speaking Engagements
Olivia is a fr equently r equested k eynote speak er, seminar
leader, and facilitator for e xecutive leadership r etreats. T o
book Olivia for a speaking engagement, you can view
highlights of her live k eynote speeches and ﬁnd mor e
information on her topics of e xpertise at
http://www .AskOlivia.com . You can also contact her via e-
mail at Olivia@AskOlivia.com .
Coaching and Consulting

--- PAGE 270 ---
For a mor e intensive or in-depth e xperience tailor ed to you
or your or ganization’s speciﬁc needs, you may also want to
explor e Olivia’s e xtensive coaching and consulting practice,
which has attracted clients such as Google, Harvar d, and
Norther n Trust. Y ou can ﬁnd mor e infor mation at
http://www .AskOlivia.com .
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 271 ---
Chapter Summaries
1. Charisma Demystiﬁed
Becoming mor e charismatic involves simple tweaks to your
behavior . Charisma doesn’t r equir e you to be outgoing or
attractive, or for you to change your personality . It’s a skill,
a discipline, lik e playing a sport or an instrument. It tak es
work, practice, and the right set of tools. This book gives
you the tools you need—which come fr om many disciplines,
from neur oscience to athletic conditioning. And because
you’r e interacting with other people every day, you get
countless opportunities to practice these skills.
2. The Charismatic Behaviors:  
Presence, Power , and W armth
Increasing your charisma involves behaviors that pr oject
more of thr ee cor e charismatic qualities: pr esence, power,
and war mth. All thr ee ar e communicated mostly thr ough
body language, which isn’t under your conscious contr ol.
Instead, your inter nal (emotional and mental) state
deter mines your body language. By choosing what you
imagine, and by lear ning how to adjust your mental state,
you can ensur e that body language pr ojects mor e presence,
power, and war mth, and thus charisma. In ter ms of
achieving charisma, your inter nal state is critical. Get the
internal state right, and the right charismatic behaviors and
body language will pour forth automatically . Being pr esent—
paying attention to what’s going on rather than being
caught up in your thoughts—can yield immense r ewar ds.

--- PAGE 272 ---
When you e xhibit pr esence, those ar ound you feel listened
to, respected, and valued.
3. The Obstacles to Presence, Power , and W armth
Discomfort aﬀects your mental state and pr events you fr om
projecting pr esence, power, and war mth. It impacts how you
feel, how you perfor m, and how others per ceive you. This
applies to both physical discomfort and mental discomfort,
such as anxiety, dissatisfaction, self -criticism, and self -
doubt. Aim to pr event discomfort by planning ahead to
ensur e comfort in clothing, location, and timing. If
discomfort arises, you can either addr ess it (for instance,
with a mental technique such as the r esponsibility transfer)
or explain it so that it’s not misper ceived. In all cases, being
awar e of the discomfort is the ﬁrst step in being able to
address it.
4. Overcoming the Obstacles
There is a simple thr ee-step pr ocess for addr essing inter nal
discomfort so that your charisma can shine thr ough. F irst,
destigmatize it by r ecognizing that we all e xperience the
same kinds of inter nal discomfort, that they’r e completely
normal and nothing to be ashamed of . Think of others
who’ve gone thr ough this befor e—especially people you
admir e—and see yourself as part of a community of human
beings e xperiencing the same feeling at the same moment.
Second, neutralize the negativity attached to the e xperience
by reminding yourself that the negative thoughts ar e not
necessarily accurate. Thir d, rewrite r eality by designing and
adopting an interpr etation of the situation that gives you a
more charismatic state.
5. Creating Charismatic Mental States

--- PAGE 273 ---
Once you’ve addr essed the obstacles, the ne xt step is to
consciously cr eate mental states that help you pr oject
charisma. V isualization, used commonly by pr ofessional
athletes, is a r emark ably versatile and powerful tool for
accessing the right mental state. P racticing gratitude,
goodwill, and compassion puts you in a mental state that
projects war mth. And compassion for yourself, surprisingly,
helps you access all aspects of charisma. Y ou can also use
those elements of body language you do contr ol, such as
postur e and facial e xpressions, to impact your mental state,
which then feeds back into the r est of your body language,
initiating a positive cycle. Just as pr ofessional athletes and
perfor mers do, plan a gradual war m-up to your peak
charismatic perfor mance. Befor e important events, avoid
experiences that would impair your war mth and plan
conﬁdence-boosting activities instead.
6. Diﬀerent Charisma Styles
Diﬀer ent styles of charisma ar e appr opriate for diﬀer ent
people and diﬀer ent situations. W e look at four that ar e both
practical and accessible. F ocus charisma is achieved
primarily thr ough pr esence and good listening, and mak es
people feel hear d, understood, and r espected. V isionary
charisma r equir es a bold vision that is deliver ed with
complete conviction; it inspir es people to believe in and
want to be a part of this vision. Kindness charisma primarily
involves war mth and acceptance, and cr eates an emotional
connection. Authority charisma is achieved primarily
through the pr ojection of power and status, and leads
people to listen or obey . You can alter nate among diﬀer ent
charisma styles or even blend them together . To decide
which charisma style to use, consider your personality, your
goals, and the speciﬁc situation at hand.

--- PAGE 274 ---
7. Charismatic First Impressions
First impr essions matter . Within minutes or even seconds,
people for m an impr ession of your status, your personality,
and much else about you, and this evaluation ﬁlters their
futur e per ceptions of you. The ﬁrst impr ession you mak e
starts with your appearance, and typically continues with
your handshak e and the start of your conversation. P eople
feel most comfortable with those who ar e similar to them in
some way, including appearance and behavior . Good ﬁrst
impressions can weigh heavily in your favor, just as bad
ones can tak e signiﬁcant work to undo . Great
conversationalists k eep the spotlight on the other person
and mak e them feel good about themselves, because
people will associate you with whatever feelings you
produce in them.
8. Speaking—and Listening—with Charisma
There are speciﬁc verbal and vocal techniques for pr ojecting
each of the thr ee elements of charisma. P resence is
communicated by listening well, not inter rupting, and
pausing befor e you speak. W armth is pr ojected by cr eating
positive associations, avoiding negative associations, and
making other people feel valued and important. P ower is
projected when you speak concisely, using metaphors and
providing high value. The pitch, tone, and tempo of your
speech ar e as important as what you say in deter mining
what you pr oject.
9. Charismatic Body Language
Your verbal communication— what  you say—primarily
reaches people’s logical side. Y our nonverbal
communication— how you say it—primarily r eaches people’s

--- PAGE 275 ---
emotional side. Nonverbal communication cr eates str onger
reactions and moves people to action. Thr ough emotional
contagion, your emotions can spr ead to other people.
Nonverbal war mth can be pr ojected by managing physical
and personal space to mak e the other person feel
comfortable, by mir roring their body language, and by
making the right kind of eye contact. Nonverbal power can
be pr ojected by using “big gorilla” body language and
avoiding unnecessary movements.
10. Diﬃcult Situations
Diﬃcult situations may challenge your charisma skills, but
they also pr esent opportunities. Charismatically handling a
diﬃcult situation can mak e the diﬀer ence between making
an enemy and making a friend. P reparation and appr oach
are important: choose the timing and location to maximize
their comfort and your charisma, and be pr epared with ways
to be both appr eciative and empathetic. When you need to
win someone over, asking them for their opinion and
expressing gratitude for things they’ve done for you in the
past ar e ways to encourage them to rationalize in your
favor . When delivering positive infor mation, mak e it speciﬁc
and personal; when delivering negative infor mation, mak e it
speciﬁc but depersonalize it. All of the charisma tools you’ve
learned ar e useful her e, especially the ones to manage your
own inter nal state.
11. Presenting with Charisma
Public speaking can have a major inﬂuence on how you ar e
perceived. Craf t your message clearly and simply, use vivid
stories, metaphors, and analogies, and focus on things the
audience can r elate to . Mak e your pr esentation short and
entertaining. W atch the value of each sentence. Choose

--- PAGE 276 ---
your clothing to cr eate a speciﬁc image and feeling, but also
to be comfortable. P ractice e xtensively (including in fr ont of
real audiences), and weed out unnecessary sounds and
motions. During the speech itself, put your focus on your
audience rather than on yourself, and don’t for get to pause
and br eathe. Use body language and intonation to e xpress
the types of power and war mth you want to pr oject. Limit
superﬂuous gestur es that distract the audience’s attention.
Pause fr equently and deliberately to show conﬁdence and
add drama as well as to give yourself a chance to br eathe.
12. Charisma in a Crisis
In times of crisis, charismatic leadership is especially
important. Others ar e often mor e open to charismatic
leadership, but they ar e also mor e sensitive to the mood
and emotions of the leader . Retain equanimity, r egularly
check your physiology, and use the tools for managing your
mental state. Expr ess high e xpectations and articulate a
vision that both addr esses the crisis and has r elevance
beyond it. Articulate a bold vision, show your conﬁdence in
your ability to r ealize that vision, and act decisively to
achieve it.
13. The Charismatic Life: Rising to the Challenge
Charisma changes the way people r elate to you, and
challenges come along with the beneﬁts. Y ou become mor e
of a magnet for praise, but also for envy, and you may be
held to higher standar ds than others. And at the highest
levels, being charismatic may set you apart enough for it to
be a lonely e xperience. Sharing cr edit, e xpressing praise for
others, and showing vulnerability can help mitigate these
possible side eﬀects. P eople may also feel mor e comfortable

--- PAGE 277 ---
with you in the moment, and open up in ways they r egret or
feel ashamed of later .
Charisma can also be powerful in the wr ong ways. P eople
may want to follow you even when you’r e wrong, r ely on
you too much, or tak e unjustiﬁed risks because of their faith
in your ability to ﬁx anything. Charisma is a powerful tool
that you need to use r esponsibly .
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 278 ---
Charisma Exercises
The following quick summaries bring together k ey exercises
detailed thr oughout this book.
Presence (page 15)
Set a timer for one minute. Close your eyes and try to focus
on one of thr ee things:
1. Sounds: Scan your envir onment for sound. Imagine your
ears ar e satellite dishes, passively r egistering sounds.
2. Your br eath: F ocus on your br eath and the sensations it
creates in your nostrils or stomach as it goes in and out.
3. Your toes: F ocus your attention on the sensations in your
toes.
Responsibility T ransfer (pages 34–35)
Whenever you feel your brain r ehashing possible outcomes
to a situation, try a transfer of r esponsibility to alleviate the
anxiety .
1. Sit comfortably or lie down, r elax, and close your eyes.
2. Take two or thr ee deep br eaths. As you inhale, imagine
drawing clean air towar d the top of your head. As you
exhale, let it whoosh out, washing all your wor ries away .
3. Imagine lif ting the weight of everything  you’r e
concer ned about oﬀ your shoulders and placing it in the

--- PAGE 279 ---
hands of whichever benevolent entity you’d lik e to put
in char ge.
Now that everything is tak en car e of, you can sit back,
relax, and enjoy whatever good you can ﬁnd along the way .
Destigmatizing Discomfort (page 46)
The ne xt time an uncomfortable emotion is hindering you,
try this step-by -step guide to destigmatizing:
1. Remind yourself that this is nor mal and that we all
experience it fr om time to time.
2. Think of others who have gone thr ough this, especially
people you admir e.
3. Remember that right now, in this very moment, many
others ar e going thr ough this very same e xperience.
Neutralizing Negativity (pages 50–51)
Use these techniques anytime you’r e having persistent
negative thoughts and you’d lik e to lessen their eﬀects.
♦ Remember that these thoughts may be inaccurate.
♦ See your thoughts as graﬃti on a wall or as little
electrical impulses.
♦ Depersonalize the e xperience. Observe it as a scientist
might: “ How inter esting, ther e are self -critical thoughts
arising.”
♦ Imagine yourself fr om afar . Zoom out to see planet Earth
hanging in space. Zoom back in to see your tiny self
having a particular e xperience at this particular moment.

--- PAGE 280 ---
♦ Imagine your mental chatter as coming fr om a radio; tur n
the volume down or put the radio to the side.
Rewriting Reality (page 56)
If a persistent mental annoyance is causing ir ritation, use
one of these techniques to imagine an alter native r eality in
order to r egain a calm inter nal state:
♦ Ask yourself a few times, “What if this e xperience is, in
fact, a good thing for me?” and watch how cr eative your
mind can get with its answers.
♦ When you’r e dealing with mor e serious situations, write
down your new r ealities by hand. W rite: “The pr esentation
is going well…” Or, better yet, use past tense: “The
presentation was a complete success…”
Getting Satisfaction (page 57)
♦ Think of someone who has aggrieved you.
♦ Take a blank page and write them a letter saying
everything you wish you had ever told them. Mak e sur e
you write it out by hand.
♦ When you’ve gotten absolutely everything oﬀ your mind,
put the letter aside.
♦ Now write their answer, apologizing for everything
they’ve done and taking r esponsibility for all their hurtful
actions.

--- PAGE 281 ---
♦ For maximum eﬀect, r eread their apology a few times
over the course of a week
Delving into Sensations (pages 62–63)
To practice your endurance in uncomfortable situations, ﬁnd
a quiet, comfortable spot to sit with a partner, and set a
timer for thirty seconds.
♦ Look into your partner’s eyes. As soon as you become
awar e of discomfort, notice wher e the feelings ar e located
in your body .
♦ Delve into each sensation as much as you can; feel its
texture. Describe each as if you wer e a chef describing a
featur ed dish.
♦ Let the discomfort build. Observe and name the
sensations you feel: hot, cold, tightness in your jaw, a
knot in your stomach.
♦ Resist the ur ge to laugh, talk, or r elieve the discomfort.
♦ Try the same practice again, this time giving yourself
continuous encouragement. R emind yourself that your
eﬀorts will r eap r ewar ds and that the discomfort will pass.
Stretching Y our Comfort Zone (pages 64–65)
Strike up a conversation with a complete stranger . When
you’r e standing or sitting near someone, see if ther e’s
something they’r e looking at that could give you something
with which to start the conversation.
Let’s say you’r e in a coﬀee shop waiting in line. Y ou could
make any small comment about the pastries, and follow

--- PAGE 282 ---
with an open-ended question (one that cannot be answer ed
with a yes or no). Say something lik e: “I’m trying to decide
which is most sinful: the muﬃn, the br ownie, or the coﬀee
cake. How would you rank them?”
Visualization (pages 69–70)
Close your eyes and r elax. Employ your senses as you focus
on a moment in your life when you felt triumphant:
♦ Hear  the sounds in the r oom: the mur murs of appr oval,
the swell of applause.
♦ See people’s smiles and e xpressions of war mth and
admiration.
♦ Feel your feet on the gr ound and the congratulatory
handshak es.
♦ Above all, experience  your feelings, the war m glow of
conﬁdence rising within you.
Gratitude (pages 77–79)
For quick gratitude access, ﬁnd thr ee things you can
approve of right now . Scan your body and your envir onment
for little, tangible things you could be grateful for .
Compassion (page 83)

--- PAGE 283 ---
Follow the thr ee steps below to practice compassion for
someone:
1. Imagine their past. What was it lik e growing up in their
family and e xperiencing their childhood?
2. Imagine their pr esent. P ut yourself in their place. See
through their eyes. Imagine what they might be feeling
right now .
3. Imagine delivering their eulogy .
Self-Compassion (page 87)
Keep a self -compassion list. Jot down ﬁve ways that you
already car e for yourself when you’r e having a har d time. If
you’r e on a r oll, go for ten. Star those that ar e particularly
eﬀective.
Metta (pages 88–89)
The visualization below will guide you thr ough Metta step by
step. If you’d pr efer to hear me guide you thr ough this
exercise, you’ll ﬁnd a r ecording online at
http://CharismaMyth.com/metta .
♦ Sit comfortably, close your eyes, and tak e two or thr ee
deep br eaths, letting them wash all your wor ries away .

--- PAGE 284 ---
♦ Think of any occasion in your life when you perfor med a
good deed, however gr eat or small.
♦ Now think of a being—pr esent, past, mythical, or actual;
person, pet, or even stuﬀed animal—that you can imagine
having war m aﬀection for you.
♦ Picture this being in your mind, and see their war mth,
kindness, and compassion. Imagine their aﬀection and let
it envelop you.
♦ Feel them give you complete for giveness for everything
your inner critic says isn’t good enough about you or your
life.
♦ Feel them giving you complete acceptance as you ar e
right now, with all your imperfections, at this stage of your
progression.
Using Y our Body to Change Y our Mind  
(pages 91–92)
Try out the following postur es to see for yourself just how
powerfully the position of your body can aﬀect your mind
and your feelings:
♦ Adopt the body language of someone who’s depr essed.
Let your shoulders slump, head hang, and face sag.
Without moving a muscle,  try to feel r eally, truly e xcited.
It’s nearly impossible.
♦ Now do the opposite. Physically spring into e xcitement.
Jump up and down, smile the biggest smile you can, wave
your ar ms in the air, and while doing all this, try to feel
depressed. Again, it’s nearly impossible.

--- PAGE 285 ---
The Perfect Handshak e (pages 121–22)
Follow the r ecommendations below to perfor m a gold-star
handshak e:
1. Keep your right hand fr ee.
2. Use plenty of eye contact, and smile war mly but brieﬂy .
3. Keep your head straight and face the other person.
4. Keep your hand perpendicular, thumb pointing straight
to the ceiling.
5. Get full palm contact by draping your hand diagonally
downwar d.
6. Wrap your ﬁngers ar ound your counterpart’s hand.
7. Once you mak e full contact, squeeze to their level of
ﬁrmness.
8. Shak e from the elbow, step back, and then let go .
Great Listening (page 128)
In your ne xt conversation, see if you can practice not
interrupting. L et the other person inter rupt, and fr om time
to time wait a second or two befor e you answer while letting
your face show the impact of what they’ve just said.
Voice Fluctuation (page 140)
You can gain gr eat insights into your own voice ﬂuctuation
by practicing sentences with a tape r ecorder. Repeat a
sentence several times with as wide a variation in styles as
you can. Say it with authority, with anger, with sor row, with
empathetic car e and concer n, with war mth, and with
enthusiasm.

--- PAGE 286 ---
Vocal Power (page 141)
The guidelines below will help you br oadcast power thr ough
your voice.
1. Speak slowly . Visualize the contrast between a nervous,
squeak y-voiced teenager speaking at high speed and
the slow, emphatic tone of a judge delivering a ver dict.
2. Pause. P eople who br oadcast conﬁdence of ten pause
while speaking. They will pause for a second or two
between sentences or even in the middle of a sentence.
This conveys the feeling that they’r e so conﬁdent in
their power, they trust that people won’t inter rupt.
3. Drop intonation. Y ou know how a voice rises at the end
of a question? Just r eread the last sentence and hear
your voice go up at the end. Now imagine an assertion:
a judge saying “This case is closed.” F eel how the
intonation of the wor d closed  drops. L owering the
intonation of your voice at the end of a sentence
broadcasts power . When you want to sound
super conﬁdent, you can even lower your intonation
midsentence.
4. Check your br eathing. Mak e sur e you’r e breathing
deeply into your belly and inhale and e xhale thr ough
your nose rather than your mouth. Br eathing thr ough
your mouth can mak e you sound br eathless and
anxious.
Charismatic Seating Choices (page 152)
The ne xt time you want to establish war m rapport with
someone, avoid a confr ontational seating ar rangement and
instead sit either ne xt to or at a 90-degr ee angle fr om them.

--- PAGE 287 ---
These ar e the positions in which we feel most comfortable.
In fact, this is an e xercise you can try out with a partner .
♦ Start a conversation at a 90-degr ee angle.
♦ After ﬁve minutes, change positions so that you’r e sitting
across fr om each other . You’ll lik ely feel a clear diﬀer ence
in comfort level.
♦ After another ﬁve minutes, move back to a 90-degr ee
angle, and feel the diﬀer ence.
♦ Finally, come back to your original position sitting ne xt to
each other .
Pay close attention to the rise and fall of feelings of trust
and comfort thr oughout the e xercise.
Being the Big Gorilla (pages 159–60)
Use this e xercise when you want to both feel and br oadcast
conﬁdence—for instance, befor e a k ey meeting, or with
someone who’s a bit intimidating.
1. Make sur e you can br eathe. L oosen any clothing if need
be.
2. Stand up and shak e up your body .
3. Take a wide stance and plant your feet ﬁr mly on the
ground.
4. Stretch your ar ms to the ceiling.
5. Stretch your ar ms to the walls on either side of you.
6. INFLATE. Try to tak e up as much space as possible.
7. Roll your shoulders up and then back.
8. Imagine yourself as a four -star general r eviewing his
troops. P uﬀ up your chest, br oaden your shoulders, and
put your ar ms behind your back.

--- PAGE 288 ---
Midcourse Corrections (page 198)
♦ Check your body . Mak e sur e no tense postur e is
worsening your inter nal state.
♦ Take a deep br eath, r elax your body .
♦ Destigmatize and dedramatize. This happens to
everyone, and it will pass.
♦ If any negative thoughts ar e present, r emember that
they’r e just thoughts, and not necessarily valid.
♦ Find little things to be grateful for : your ability to br eathe,
the fact that you will still be alive by the end of this.
♦ Imagine getting a gr eat hug fr om someone you trust for
twenty seconds (of course, you may not have twenty
seconds, but if you do, this is r emark ably eﬀective).
Once your thr eat response is quieted down, to bring yourself
back into a state of conﬁdence, r emember a moment in
your life when you felt absolute triumph. Thanks to your
brain’s inability to distinguish imagination fr om reality, your
body will be ﬁlled with the same cocktail of chemicals as it
was during that conﬁdence-ﬁlled moment, ther eby changing
your body language into e xactly what you need to be
impressive, persuasive, and inspiring again.
Showing V ulnerability (page 217)
Think of the ne xt low-stak es conversation you’r e going to
have and follow the steps below to show a little
vulnerability :

--- PAGE 289 ---
♦ Select a small vulnerability you could shar e.
♦ To prepare, perfor m a r esponsibility transfer for the
outcome of this e xercise.
♦ During the conversation, ease into the sharing by saying,
“You know, I have to tell you…” Or pr epare the ter rain
with, “I’m feeling a bit nervous about saying this, but…”
♦ Ask for their conﬁdentiality . Not only will this mak e you
feel safer, it will mak e people tr easur e the moment.
People love secr ets.
♦ Perform a quick r esponsibility transfer immediately af ter
sharing the vulnerability .
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 290 ---
Acknowledgments
I WAS BLESSED  with the e xtraor dinary privilege to have some of
the best minds I know involved thr oughout this pr ocess.
Thanks, above and beyond, to Daniel Lieber man—
pedagogical e xpert, content maestr o, structur e wizar d—for
his extraor dinarily k een insights, clear thinking, and awe-
inspiring gener osity.
A number of people dedicated much-appr eciated time,
insights, and valuable brainpower to this endeavor : Barney
Pell, Mark Herschber g, Artem Boystov, Joshua K eay, Natalie
Philips, and Zachary Burt.
William Bosl at the Harvar d-MIT Health Sciences and
Technology pr ogram, Stephen K osslyn of Stanfor d’s Center
for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences, and Maxine
Rodenthuis at the UC Berk eley Haas School of Business
provided fantastic r esear ch work.
Many of these gr eat business minds wer e so kind as to
contribute insights: Chris Ashenden, Gilles August, Hayes
Barnard, Sunny Bates, Steve Bell, Charles Best, Michael
Feuer, T im Flynn, Scott F reidheim, Matt F urman, Carl
Guar dino, Catherine Dumait Harper, Ira Jackson, K en Jacobs,
Randy K omisar, Jim Lar ranaga, Jack L eslie, Maurice L evy,
Dan’l L ewin, Angel Martinez, Jeﬀ Mirich, F arhad Mohit, P eter
Moor e, Elon Musk, T om Schir o, Nina Simosk o, Kevin Surace,
Peter Thiel, Duncan W ardle, Bill Whitmor e, and Bill W ohl.
With gr eat skill, dedication, patience, kindness, and
gener osity, Courtney Y oung led P enguin’s impr essive team
eﬀort. A drienne Schultz work ed wonders, making the writing
clear er and mor e concise, and gr eatly impr oving the ﬂow .
Rebecca Gradinger at Fletcher & Company took a chance on
a ﬁrst-time author .

--- PAGE 291 ---
I was blessed to have wonderful help, comments, and
encouragement fr om W illiam Bachman, Silvia Console
Battiliana, Clark Ber nier, Devon and P ablo Cohn, Malcolm
Collins, F abian Cuntze, Daniel F ord, Darius Golk ar, Joe
Greenstein, Omar Sultan Haque, Jaden Hastings, Rich
Heck er, Chris Hill, Samantha Holdsworth, Jesse Jacobs, Ale x
Kehl, Eric K eller, Emma Ber ntman Kraf t, Jessamyn Lau, Gr eg
Levin, Gr eg Lory, Ana R owena McCullough, P atrick McK enna,
Shauna Mei, Xavier Mor elle, Earl P into, Judah P ollack, Semira
Rahemtulla, Dom Ricci, P rofessor John P aul R ollert and his
Harvar d class, Jean Yves SantaMaria, K atharina Schmitt, Jon
Teo, J. R . Wurster, Justyna Zander, and R oni Zeiger .
I would also lik e to dedicate this book to my clients, as
together we’ve shar ed in discoveries, confessions, laughter,
struggles, r evelations, triumph, pride, and joy . I’m looking
forwar d to continuing our jour ney together .
To the teachers whose wisdom guided me along the path:
Tara Brach, David and Shoshana Cooper, Michele McDonald,
Linda McDonald, and V ictoria Moran.
To my family and e xtended family : Bernard Cabane and
Celie F ox Cabane, Guillaume Cabane and Marine Aubry,
Gerar d Cabane, David and Doris Schoenfarber, Bar ney P ell
and Nadya Dir ekova, Deepak and Nalini Bradoo, R uth
Owades, Anusheel Bhushan, and Michael McCullough.
And always, to P rivahini Bradoo, F abian Cuntze, Joe
Greenstein, Joshua K eay, Judah P ollack, Seena R ejal, Natalie
Philips, David Dayan R osenman, and T orsten R ode. Y ou have
made me who I am today . You keep me gr ounded. Y ou own a
piece of my heart.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 292 ---
Notes
Introduction
1. Recounted by Redbook  editor R obert Stein, who followed Marilyn thr oughout
this episode ( American Heritage  magazine, November/December 2005).
2. B. J. A volio, D. A . Waldman, and W . O. Einstein, “T ransfor mational L eadership
in a Management Game Simulation,” Journal of Management, Gr oup and
Organizational Studies  13 (1988): 59–80; B. J. A volio and B. M. Bass,
“Transfor mational L eadership, Charisma, and Beyond,” in Emer ging
Leadership V istas,  eds. J. G. Hunt, B. R . Baliga, H . P. Dachler, and C. A .
Schriesheim (L exington, MA : Lexington Books, 1988), 29–49; Hater and Bass,
“Superiors’ Evaluation and Subor dinates’ P erceptions of T ransfor mational and
Transactional L eadership,” Journal of Applied P sychology  (1988): 695–702; G.
A. Yukl and D. D. V an Fleet, “ Cross-Situational Multimethod R esear ch on
Military L eader Eﬀectiveness,” Organizational Behavior and Human
Performance  30 (1982): 87–108.
3. B. Shamir, M. Arthur, and R . House, “The Rhetoric of Charismatic L eadership:
A Theor etical Extension, a Case Study, and Implications for R esear ch,”
Leadership Quarterly  5 (1994): 25–42.
4. Robert J. House, The Rise and Decline of Charismatic L eadership,  The
Wharton School at the University of P ennsylvania, r ev. January 26, 1999,
http://leadership.wharton.upenn.edu/l_change/publications/House/Rise%20an
d%20Decline%20of%20Charismatic%20L eadership%20-%20House.doc ; R. J.
House and B. Shamir, “T owar d the Integration of Charismatic,
Transfor mational, Inspirational and V isionary Theories of L eadership,” in
Leadership Theory and R esear ch Perspecties and Dir ections,  ed. M.
Chemmers and R . Ayman (New Y ork: A cademic P ress, 1993): 81–107; R . J.
House and J. M. Howell, “Personality and Charismatic L eadership,” Leadership
Quarterly  3, no . 2 (1992): 81–108.
5. A. Erez, V. F. Misangyi, D. E. Johnson, M. A . LePine, and K. C. Halverson,
“Stirring the Hearts of Charismatic L eadership as the T ransfer ral of Aﬀect,”
Journal of Applied P sychology  93, no . 3 (2008): 602–16; C. G. Br ooks Jr .,
“Leadership, L eadership, Wher efore Art Thou L eadership?” Respiratory Car e
Clinics of North America  10, no . 2 (2004): 157–71.
1. Charisma Demystiﬁed
1. A gr oup of enterprising behavioral scientists demonstrated the feasibility of
increasing people’s level of charisma in a contr olled laboratory setting
through a series of multiple contr olled e xperiments. They analyzed which
verbal and nonverbal behaviors could be used to incr ease or decr ease

--- PAGE 293 ---
charisma. Their test subjects’ levels of charisma r ose and fell depending on
which behaviors they wer e instructed to demonstrate. As long as you know
how to e xhibit the cor rect body language and behaviors, you will be seen as
charismatic. J. M. Howell and P . J. Frost, “ A Lab Study of Charismatic
Leadership,” Organizational Behavior and Human Decision P rocesses  43
(1989): 243–69.
2. R. E. Riggio, “ Charisma,” in Encyclopedia of L eadership,  eds. J. M. Bur ns, W .
Goethals, and G. Sor enson (Gr eat Bar rington, MA : Berkshir e Publishing,
2004), 1:158–62.
2. The Charismatic Behaviors
1. Li, W ., R. E. Zinbar g, S. G. Boehm, and K. A . Paller. “Neural and Behavioral
Evidence for Aﬀective P riming fr om Unconsciously P erceived Emotional F acial
Expressions and the Inﬂuence of T rait Anxiety,” Journal of Cognitive
Neur oscience  20 (2003): 95–107.
2. Daniel Gilbert has done some fascinating r esear ch on happiness. Daniel T odd
Gilbert, Stumbling on Happiness  (New Y ork: Alfr ed A. Knopf, 2006).
3. S. T . Fiske, A. J. C. Cuddy, and P . Glick, “Universal Dimensions of Social
Cognition: W armth and Competence,” Trends in Cognitive Sciences  11, no . 2
(February 1, 2007): 77–83.
4. Alex (Sandy) P entland, Honest Signals—How They Shape Our W orld
(Cambridge, MA : The MIT P ress, 2008).
5. J. I. Davis, J. J. Gr oss, and K. N. Ochsner, “ Psychological Distance and
Emotional Experience: What Y ou See Is What Y ou Get,” Emotion  11, no . 2
(2011): 438–44. J. J. Gr oss, G. Sheppes, and H . L. Ur ry, “Emotion Generation
and Emotion R egulation: A Distinction W e Should Mak e (Car efully),” Cognition
and Emotion  25, no . 5 (2011): 765–81. doi:10.1080/02699931.2011.555753.
6. P. Ekman, R . J. Davidson, and W . V. Friesen, “The Duchenne Smile: Emotional
Expression and Brain Physiology : II,” Journal of P ersonality and Social
Psychology  58, no . 2 (1990): 342–53.
7. R. A. Hahn, “The Nocebo Phenomenon: Concept, Evidence, and Implications
for Public Health,” Preventive Medicine  26, no . 5, part 1 (September–October
1997): 607–11.
3. The Obstacles to Presence, Power , and W armth
1. M. T . Gailliot, R . F. Baumeister, C. N. DeW all, J. K. Maner, E. A . Plant, D. M.
Tice, et al., “Self -Contr ol Relies on Glucose as a Limited Ener gy Sour ce:
Willpower Is Mor e Than a Metaphor,” Journal of P ersonality and Social
Psychology  92, no . 2 (2007): 325-36.
2. See Jeﬀ Bell, When in Doubt, Mak e Belief  (Novato, CA : New W orld Library,
2009).
3. S. Har ris, S. A . Sheth, and M. S. Cohen, “ Functional Neur oimaging of Belief,
Disbelief, and Uncertainty,” Annals of Neur ology  63 (2008): 14.
4. Image generation has a powerful impact on emotions and physiological
states and a high impact on brain function. See A . Hackmann, “W orking with

--- PAGE 294 ---
Images in Clinical P sychology,” in Compr ehensive Clinical P sychology,  eds. A .
Bellack and M. Hersen (L ondon: P ergamon, 1998), 301–17.
5. T. J. Kaptchuk, E. F riedlander, J. M. K elley, et al., “ Placebos without Deception:
A Randomized Contr olled T rial in Ir ritable Bowel Syndr ome” (2010),
http://www .plosone.or g/article/info:doi/10.1371/jour nal.pone.0015591 .
6. I highly r ecommend R obert Sapolsk y’s fascinating—and fr ee—Stanfor d
University lectur e “Why Zebras Don’t Get Ulcers” on iT unes.
7. David R ock, “SCARF : A Brain- Based Model for Collaborating with and
Inﬂuencing Others,” Neur oLeadership Jour nal 1 (2008).
8. P. R. Clance and S. A . Imes, “The Imposter Phenomenon in High A chieving
Women: Dynamics and Therapeutic Intervention,” Psychotherapy : Theory,
Resear ch and P ractice  15, no . 3 (1978): 241–47.
4. Overcoming the Obstacles
1. David R ock, Your Brain at W ork (New Y ork: HarperBusiness, 2009).
2. D. J. Simons and C. F . Chabris, “ Gorillas in Our Midst: Sustained Inattentional
Blindness for Dynamic Events,” Perception  28, no . 9 (1999): 1059–74,
http://en.wikipedia.or g/wiki/Digital_object_identiﬁer .
3. James J. Gr oss, “Emotion R egulation: Aﬀective, Cognitive, and Social
Consequences,” Psychophysiology  39, no . 3 (May 2002): 281–89.
4. Ibid., 289.
5. T. J. Kaptchuk, E. F riedlander, J. M. K elley, et al., “ Placebos without Deception:
A Randomized Contr olled T rial in Ir ritable Bowel Syndr ome” (2010),
http://www .plosone.or g/article/info:doi/10.1371/jour nal.pone.0015591 .
6. Andr ew Hunt, Pragmatic Thinking and L earning: R efactor Y our W etwar e, rev.
ed. (R aleigh, NC: P ragmatic Bookshelf, 2010).
7. Robert B. Cialdini, Inﬂuence: The P sychology of P ersuasion,  rev. ed. (New
York: Harper P aperbacks, 2006); and B. J. Sagarin, R . B. Cialdini, W . E. Rice,
and S. B. Ser na, “Dispelling the Illusion of Invulnerability : The Motivations and
Mechanisms of R esistance to P ersuasion,” Journal of P ersonality and Social
Psychology  83, no . 3 (2002): 526–41
8. Hunt, Pragmatic Thinking and L earning.
5. Creating Charismatic Mental States
1. David R ock, Your Brain at W ork (New Y ork: HarperBusiness, 2009)
2. Ibid., and Jeﬀ Hawkins, On Intelligence,  adapted ed. (New Y ork: T imes Books,
2004).
3. On a scale of suicides per 100,000 since 1990, MIT had a rate of 10.2,
compar ed to Harvar d with a rate of 7.4, and Johns Hopkins, the thir d-place
school, with a rate of 6.9.
4. R. A. Emmons and A . Mishra, “Why Gratitude Enhances W ell-Being: What W e
Know, What W e Need to Know,” in Designing P ositive P sychology : Taking
Stock and Moving F orwar d, eds. K. Sheldon, T . Kashdan, and M. F . Steger
(New Y ork: Oxfor d University P ress, 2011); R . A. Emmons, “ Gratitude,” in

--- PAGE 295 ---
Encyclopedia of P ositive P sychology,  eds. S. J. L opez and A . Beauchamp (New
York: Oxfor d University P ress, 2009), 442–47.
5. Martin E. P . Seligman, Authentic Happiness: Using the New P ositive
Psychology to R ealize Y our P otential for Lasting F ulﬁllment  (New Y ork: F ree
Press, 2002).
6. K. D. Neﬀ, “Self -Compassion,” in Handbook of Individual Diﬀer ences in Social
Behavior,  eds. M. R . Leary and R . H. Hoyle (New Y ork: Guilfor d Press, 2009),
561–73.
7. K. D. Neﬀ, “Self -Compassion, Self -Esteem, and W ell-Being,” Social and
Personality Compass  5 (2011): 1–12; K. D. Neﬀ and P . McGeehee, “Self -
Compassion and P sychological R esilience among A dolescents and Y oung
Adults,”  Self and Identity  9 (2010): 225–40; K. D. Neﬀ, K. Kirkpatrick, and S. S.
Rude, “Self -Compassion and Its Link to A daptive P sychological F unctioning,”
Journal of R esear ch in P ersonality  41 (2007): 139–54.
8. K. D. Neﬀ, “Self -Compassion,” in Handbook of Individual Diﬀer ences.
9. Ibid. Self -compassion deactivates the thr eat system (which generates
feelings of fear, insecurity, and defensiveness) and activates the soothing
system instead.
10. T. Barnhofer, T . Chittk a, H. Nightingale, C. V isser, and C. Crane, “State Eﬀects
of Two Forms of Meditation on P refrontal EEG Asymmetry in P reviously
Depr essed Individuals,” Mindfulness  1, no . 1 (2010): 21–27; T . Barnhofer, D.
Duggan, C. Crane, S. Hepbur n, M. J. F ennell, and J. M. W illiams, “Eﬀects of
Meditation on F rontal Alpha- Asymmetry in P reviously Suicidal Individuals,”
Neur oReport  18, no . 7 (2007): 709–12; B. R . Cahn and J. P olich, “Meditation
States and T raits: EEG, ERP, and Neur oimaging Studies,” Psychological
Bulletin  132, no . 2 (2006): 180–211; G. F eldman, J. Gr eeson, and J. Senville,
“Diﬀer ential Eﬀects of Mindful Br eathing, P rogressive Muscle R elaxation, and
Loving-Kindness Meditation on Decentering and Negative R eactions to
Repetitive Thoughts,” Behaviour R esear ch and Therapy  48, no . 10 (2010):
1002–11; A . Manna, A . Raﬀone, M. G. P errucci, D. Nar do, A . Ferretti, A .
Tartar o, et al., “Neural Cor relates of F ocused A ttention and Cognitive
Monitoring in Meditation,” Brain R esear ch Bulletin  82, nos. 1–2 (2010): 46–56.
11. Paul Gilbert, Mark W . Baldwin, Chris Ir ons, Jodene R . Baccus, and Michelle
Palmer, “Self -Criticism and Self -Warmth: An Imagery Study Exploring Their
Relation to Depr ession,” Journal of Cognitive P sychotherapy  20, no . 2 (2006):
183–200.
12. D. R . Carney, A . J. C. Cuddy, and A . J. Yap, “Power P osing: Brief Nonverbal
Displays Aﬀect Neur oendocrine L evels and Risk T olerance,” Psychological
Science OnlineF irst, September 21, 2010,
http://www .people.hbs.edu/acuddy/in%20pr ess,%20car ney,%20cuddy,%20&
%20yap,%20psych%20science.pdf .
13. R. F. Baumeister, “Ego Depletion and Self -Regulation F ailure: A Resour ce
Model of Self -Contr ol,” Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental R esear ch 27, no .
2 (2003): 281–84.
14. M. T . Gailliot, R . F. Baumeister, C. N. DeW all, J. K. Maner, E. A . Plant, D. M.
Tice, et al., “Self -Contr ol Relies on Glucose as a Limited Ener gy Sour ce:
Willpower Is Mor e Than a Metaphor,” Journal of P ersonality and Social
Psychology  92, no . 2 (2007): 325–36.

--- PAGE 296 ---
6. Diﬀerent Charisma Styles
1. S. Milgram, Obedience to Authority : An Experimental V iew (New Y ork: Harper
& Row, 1975); N. J. R ussell, “Milgram’s Obedience to Authority Experiments:
Origins and Early Evolution,” British Jour nal of Social P sychology  50, part 1
(2011): 140–62.
2. A. Freed, P . Chandler, J. Mouton, and R . Blak e, “Stimulus and Backgr ound
Factors in Sign V iolation,” Journal of P ersonality  23 (1955): 499.
3. R. M. A . Nelisson and M. H . C. Meijers, “Social Beneﬁts of L uxury Brands as
Costly Signals of W ealth and Status,” Evolution & Human Behavior  32, no . 5
(2011): 343–55.
4. From Halpin in 1954 to P illai in 1991.
7. Charismatic First Impressions
1. John K enneth Galbraith, Economics, P eace and Laughter  (New Y ork: New
American Library, 1971), 50.
2. Dr. Nalini Ambady, First Impr essions  (New Y ork: Guilfor d Press, 2008).
3. L. P. Naumann, S. V azire, P. J. Rentfrow, and S. D. Gosling, “ Personality
Judgments Based on Physical Appearance,” Personality and Social P sychology
Bulletin  35, no . 12 (2009): 1661–71.
4. P. Bork enau, S. Br ecke, C. Mottig, and M. P aeleck e, “Extraversion Is
Accurately P erceived A fter a 50-Ms Exposur e to a F ace,” Journal of R esear ch
in Personality  43 (2009): 703–6; P . Bork enau and A . Liebler, “T rait Infer ences:
Sources of V alidity at Zer o Acquaintance, Journal of P ersonality and Social
Psychology  62 (1992): 645–57; S. D. Gosling, S. J. K o, T. Mannar elli, and M. E.
Morris, “A Room with a Cue: P ersonality Judgments Based on Oﬃces and
Bedrooms, Journal of P ersonality and Social P sychology  82 (2002): 379–98; M.
J. Levesque and D. A . Kenny, “ Accuracy of Behavioral P redictions at Zer o
Acquaintance: A Social R elations Analysis, Journal of P ersonality and Social
Psychology  65 (1993): 1178–87.
5. N. Ambady and R . Rosenthal, “ Half a Minute: P redicting T eacher Evaluations
from Thin Slices of Nonverbal Behavior and Physical A ttractiveness,” Journal
of Personality and Social P sychology  64, no . 3 (1993): 431–41.
6. T. Emswiller, K. Deaux, and J. E. W illits, “Similarity, Se x, and R equests for
Small F avors,” Journal of Applied Social P sychology  1 (1971): 284–91.
7. G. L. Stewart, S. L. Dustin, M. R . Barrick, and T . C. Dar nold, “Exploring the
Handshak e in Employment Interviews,” Journal of Applied P sychology  93, no .
5 (September 2008): 1139–46.
8. Speaking—and Listening—with Charisma
1. Ronald E. Riggio, The Charisma Quotient: What It Is, How to Get It, How to
Use It  (New Y ork: Dodd Mead: 1988), 76.
2. Artur Schnabel, in Chicago Daily News,  June 11, 1958.
3. Robert B. Cialdini, Inﬂuence: The P sychology of P ersuasion,  rev. ed. (New
York: Harper P aperbacks, 2006).

--- PAGE 297 ---
4. Ibid.
5. Dale Car negie, How to W in Friends and Inﬂuence P eople  (New Y ork: Simon &
Schuster, 1936).
6. A. Hackmann, “W orking with Images in Clinical P sychology,” in
Compr ehensive Clinical P sychology,  eds. A . Bellack and M. Hersen (L ondon:
Pergamon, 1998), 301–17.
7. Riggio, Charisma Quotient.
8. R. P. Perry, P. C. Abrami, and L. L eventhal, “Educational Seduction: The Eﬀect
of Instructor Expr essiveness and L ectur e Content on Student R atings and
Achievement,” Journal of Educational P sychology  71 (1979): 107–16.
9. A. Drahota, A . Costall, and V . Reddy, “The V ocal Communication of Diﬀer ent
Kinds of Smile,” Speech Communication  50, no . 4 (2008): 278.
9. Charismatic Body Language
1. D. Goleman, “What Mak es a L eader?” Harvar d Business R eview  (January
2004).
2. Ronald E. Riggio, The Charisma Quotient: What It Is, How to Get It, How to
Use It  (New Y ork: Dodd Mead, 1988).
3. J. E. Bono and R . Ilies, “ Charisma, P ositive Emotions and Mood Contagion,”
The L eadership Quarterly  17, no . 4 (2006): 317–34.
4. Ker Than, “Why Some Old L overs L ook Alik e,” LiveScience,  February 14,
2006.
5. D. Goleman and R . Boyatzi, “Social Intelligence and the Biology of
Leadership,” Harvar d Business R eview  (September 2008).
6. N. Gueguen, C. Jacob, and A . Martin, “Mimicry in Social Interaction: Its Eﬀect
on Human Judgment and Behavior,” European Jour nal of Social Sciences  8,
no. 2 (2009).
7. Heini Hediger, The P sychology and Behaviour of Animals in Zoos and
Circuses  (New Y ork: Dover P ublications, 1955).
8. Allan and Barbara P ease, The Deﬁnitive Book of Body Language  (New Y ork:
Bantam, 2006).
9. Ibid.
10. J. Kellerman, J. L ewis, and J. D. Lair d, “Looking and L oving: The Eﬀects of
Mutual Gaze on F eelings of R omantic L ove,” Journal of R esear ch in P ersonality
23 (1989): 145–61.
11. Les Fehmi and Jim R obbins, The Open-F ocus Brain: Har nessing the P ower of
Attention to Heal Mind and Body  (Boston: T rumpeter, 2007).
10. Diﬃcult Situations
1. E. Ar onson, R . D. Ak ert, and T . D. W ilson, Social P sychology,  6th ed. (Upper
Saddle River, NJ: P earson P rentice Hall, 2006).
2. K. Izuma, D. N. Saito, and N. Sadato, “ Processing of Social and Monetary
Rewar ds in the Human Striatum,” Neur on 58, no . 2 (2008): 284–94.
3. D. A . Redelmeier, J. K atz, and D. K ahneman, “Memories of Colonoscopy : A
Randomized T rial,” Pain 104, nos. 1–2 (2003): 187–94.

--- PAGE 298 ---
11. Presenting with Charisma
1. “What’s with the Newspapers?” Plain Language at W ork Newsletter  (May 15,
2005), http://www .impact-
information.com/impactinfo/newsletter/plwork15.htm ; S. L. Mailloux, M. E.
Johnson, D. G. F isher, and T . J. Pettibone, “ How R eliable Is Computerized
Assessment of R eadability?” Computers in Nursing  13, no . 5 (1995): 221–25;
Joe Kimble, “W riting for Dollars, W riting to Please,” Scribes Jour nal of L egal
Writing,  1996–97, http://www .plainlanguagenetwork.or g/kimble/dollars.htm .
2. P. Valdez and A . Mehrabian, “Eﬀects of Color on Emotions,” Journal of
Experimental P sychology : General  123, no . 4 (1994): 394–409; T . W. Whitﬁeld
and T . J. W iltshir e, “Color P sychology : A Critical Review,” Genetic, Social, and
General P sychology Monographs  116, no . 4 (1990): 385–411.
12. Charisma in a Crisis
1. G. Dever eux, “ Charismatic L eadership and Crisis,” in Psychoanalysis and the
Social Sciences,  vol. 4, eds. W . Muensterber ger and S. Ax elrod (New Y ork:
Dutton, 1955): 145–57.
2. Robert B. Cialdini, Inﬂuence: The P sychology of P ersuasion,  rev. ed. (New
York: Harper P aperback, 2006).
13. The Charismatic Life: Rising to the Challenge
1. Jay A . Conger and R abindra N. K anungo, “T owar d a Behavioral Theory of
Charismatic L eadership in Or ganizational Settings,” A cademy of
Management. The A cademy of Management R eview  12, no . 4 (1987).
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 299 ---
About the Author
AN EXPER T IN the ﬁelds of charisma and leadership, Olivia F ox
Cabane has lectur ed at Harvar d, Yale, Stanfor d, MIT, and the
United Nations. As a fr equent k eynote speak er and
executive coach to the leadership of F ortune 500
companies, she helps people incr ease their ability to
inﬂuence, persuade, and inspir e others.
From a base of thor ough behavioral science, Olivia
extracts the most practical tools for business, giving her
clients techniques she ﬁrst pr esented at Harvar d and MIT .
In addition to being a r egular columnist for Forbes,  Olivia
is often featur ed in media such as the New Y ork T imes,
Bloomber g, and BusinessW eek and was r ecently pr oﬁled in
the Wall Str eet Jour nal.
Olivia has both F rench and American nationalities and is
ﬂuent in four and a half languages; she was the youngest
person ever to have been appointed for eign trade adviser to
the F rench gover nment.
OceanofPDF .com

--- PAGE 300 ---
Index
academia, 3
acceptance, 103, 231
adrenaline, 38, 170, 196–97
alpha males, 86, 219
American Expr ess, 118–19
analogies, 189, 233
anger, 50, 52, 170
annoyances, 77
anxiety, 32–37, 38, 40, 42, 50, 56, 86, 90, 202
apologies, 165, 171, 180–83, 186
appearance, 102, 232
authority charisma and, 106
at presentations, 191
Apple, 101, 189
appreciation, 75–79, 168–70, 209, 233
arrogance, 106, 162
assertiveness, 92
athletic conditioning, 12, 38
attention, 138–39
attractiveness, 10
authority, 142, 191, 210
authority charisma, 98, 104–7, 109–10, 112, 119, 167, 231
awar eness, 30–31, 161
bad news, 165, 172–75, 186, 233
Barnard, Hayes, 109, 215–16
Batman  (ﬁlm), 40
behavior, 232
visionary charisma and, 101
warmth and, 18

--- PAGE 301 ---
behavioral science, 11, 85, 94, 115, 150
Benjamin F ranklin Eﬀect, 167–68, 208
Berman, A dam, 34
blinking, 21, 153
boardroom pr esence, 5
body language, 4, 17, 18, 20–24, 26, 27, 39, 41, 42, 53, 58,
109, 111, 128, 143–64, 229–30, 232–34
for actors, 68
anxiety and, 32, 202
apologies and, 181
authority charisma and, 106
bad news and, 174, 186
compassion and, 176
criticism and, 179
empathy and, 171
enthusiasm, 139
exercise of, 91–92
focus charisma and, 99, 100
goodwill and, 80, 82
gratitude and, 76
kindness charisma and, 103
mental states cr eated by, 91–92, 103, 240
mimicking, 146–50, 163, 164
on phone, 184
physical discomforts and, 29–31
stress hor mones and, 170
visionary charisma and, 101
visualization and, 68, 69, 73, 97
Bosl, W illiam, 35–36
bounce back technique, 124
Brach, T ara, 18
Bradoo, P rivahini, 81
brain:
as changeable, 68
imaginary v . real indistinguishable to, 24–25, 26, 44, 55
left frontal lobes, 88

--- PAGE 302 ---
Brando, Marlon, 68
breathing, 15, 16, 17, 30, 129, 141, 195–96, 198, 234, 235,
241–42
Brown, Br ené, 45
brute for ce, 19
Buddha, 88
Bush, Geor ge W ., 101, 110, 203, 216
business, 100
business success, handling uncertainty and, 34
Califor nia, University of, at Berk eley, 11
calls, 96–97
calm, 172
candles, 174
Capone, Al, 169
Carnegie, Dale, 135, 168
Ceci, Stephen, 139
CEOs, 6, 116–17, 218
Chariots of F ire, 71
charisma:
as applied science, 6
authority, 98, 104–7, 109–10, 112, 119, 167, 231
as believed innate, 2, 4
beneﬁts of, 2–3
choosing right style of, 98–114, 166
conscious practice of, 11, 12, 14, 15, 34–35, 46, 50–51, 56,
57, 62–63, 64–65, 69–70, 77–79, 81, 83, 87, 88–89, 91–
92, 96, 108, 119, 121–22, 140, 141, 152, 155, 159–60,
199, 217, 235–43
creating mental states of, 67–97
in a crisis, 201–5, 234
as critical in business, 3
downsides of, 206–21
experimenting with, 111, 113, 114
ﬂuctuations in level of, 4

--- PAGE 303 ---
focus, 98–101, 103, 107, 109, 110, 112, 166–67, 181, 214,
231
kindness, 98, 102–4, 107, 109, 110, 112, 133, 158, 171,
175, 214, 231
learning of, 2, 4, 22
myths of, 9–12, 229
obstacles to, 27–42, 43–66, 67, 230
as originating in mind, 21–23
putting work into, 6
studies of, 5, 9, 10, 51
styles of, 98–114, 231
visionary, 98, 101–2, 103, 107, 108, 109, 110, 112, 136,
167, 231
warming up for, 93–97, 103, 172
chin, 162, 182
chromatic eﬀects, 191
Chrysler, 137
Churchill, W inston, 10, 50, 112, 201
Clinton, Bill, 2, 6, 80, 109, 134–35, 208–9, 216–17
clothing, 19, 30, 42, 47, 102, 106, 118–19, 127, 159, 230,
233–34
authority status and, 105
cognitive r eappraisal, 52–54
cognitive science, 11
Columbia University, 91
comedians, 193
comfort, 152
comfort zones, 64–65, 114, 151, 224
comparison, 37
compassion, 79–82, 83–84, 97, 103, 150, 176, 231, 239
self-, 84–90, 103, 181, 239
compliments, 134–36
conﬁdence, 32, 39–41, 43, 60, 67, 69, 70, 92, 97, 142, 161,
172
authority conﬁdence and, 104–7
kindness charisma and, 102–4

--- PAGE 304 ---
self-, 84, 85–86, 94–95
conscious mir roring, 146–50
consultants, 100
continuous partial attention, 16
conversations, 7, 123–26, 127, 232
exiting, 125–26, 127, 179–80
hostile, 100
cortisol, 38
creativity, 107
critical thinking, 106
criticism, 165, 175–80, 186
self-, 38–39, 40, 42, 50, 86–87, 90
Dalai Lama, 5, 19, 87, 88, 98, 103, 104, 112
Darius, 147–49
Darwin, Charles, 74
Deck ers Outdoors, 83
dedramatize, 46, 59, 66, 198, 202
defensiveness, 177
Deloitte, 83
delving into sensations, 61, 62–64, 100, 129
DeNir o, Robert, 68
depersonalization, 176–77, 233
depression, 86, 90
desperation, 75
destigmatizing, 43–46, 47, 51, 58, 59, 65, 66, 198, 202, 236
Deutsche Bank, 124–25
Diana, P rincess of W ales, 112
diﬃcult people, 7, 165–72
discomfort, 47, 60–61, 66
delving into, 61, 62–64
destigmatizing, 43–46, 47, 51, 58, 59, 65, 66, 198, 202,
236
mental, 31–41, 43, 44, 65
physical, 28–31, 42, 43, 44, 59, 65, 66
practice with, 62–63, 64–65

--- PAGE 305 ---
Disraeli, Benjamin, 9, 20, 124, 133
dissatisfaction, 37, 40, 42
distractions, 15–16
dramatic pauses, 196–97
Druck er, Peter, 220
Edison, Thomas, 74
Egypt, 120
Ekman, P aul, 111 n
e-mails, 73, 97, 183, 185, 186
Emerson, R alph W aldo, 74
emotional contagion, 145–46, 164
emotions, 91, 144, 163, 211
empathy, 82, 145, 160, 170, 171, 176, 233
while delivering criticism, 175–76
facial e xpressions and, 174
energy, 92
engineers, 24
entertainment, 138, 142
enthusiasm, 139, 156, 185
envy, 207–11
equanimity, 201–2, 234
executive pr esence, 5
executives, 23
external skills, 23
extroverts, 108
eye contact, 111, 122, 153–56, 162, 164
“Eye of the T iger” (song), 71
eyes, 28–29, 30, 31, 42
facial e xpressions, 14, 21–22, 38–39, 47, 91, 97, 111, 130–
31
apologies and, 181
criticisms and, 179, 182
delayed, 184
empathy and, 174

--- PAGE 306 ---
Fauré, Gabriel, 196
fear, 40–41
feedback, 106, 107
Fehmi, L es, 154
Feuer, Michael, 184
ﬁdgeting, 106, 149, 160, 161, 173
ﬁght or ﬂight, 5, 38, 41, 52, 117, 144, 159, 197
ﬁrelight, 174
ﬁreside chats, 194
ﬁrst impr essions, 115–27, 149, 232
“ﬁrsts,” 177
Fisher, Helen, 153
“Flying” (song), 71
focus, 183–84, 191
focus charisma, 98–101, 103, 107, 109, 110, 112, 166–67,
181, 214, 231
Franklin, Benjamin, 167–68, 178
French R evolution, 201
frustration, 130
functional MRI scans, 80
funerals, imagining, 78–79, 83
Galbraith, John K enneth, 115, 169
Gandhi, Mohandas, 112, 201
Gates, Bill, 19, 99, 112
Germer, Christopher, 87, 90
gestur es, 139
Gilbert, Daniel, 16
Gilbert, P aul, 82
Gladstone, W illiam, 9, 20
glucose, 29
goals, 107, 110, 113
Goldsmith, Marshall, 215, 220
Goleman, Daniel, 146
good feelings, 138, 142
goodwill, 79–82, 97, 103, 111, 114, 199, 231

--- PAGE 307 ---
criticism and, 182–83, 186
practice of, 81, 83
Google, 119, 135
gorilla e xercise, 158, 159, 164, 193, 242
graﬃti metaphor, 49, 50, 66
gratitude, 75–79, 97, 103, 231, 238
practice of, 77–79
gravitas, 92
Gross, James, 22 n
Gruenfeld, Deborah, 158, 159
Gulf W ar, 203
handshak es, 119–23, 127, 240
Hanson, Rick, 82
happiness, 53 n, 81
Haque, Omar Sultan, 201
Harvar d Business R eview,  144, 146
Harvar d Medical School, 55
Harvar d University, 73, 91, 116–17
Hayes, Stephen, 49, 51
hedonic adaptation, 76
Hill, Napoleon, 74
Hitler, A dolf, 220
House, R obert, 3, 203
Howar d, John Newton, 71
How to W in Friends and Inﬂuence P eople  (Car negie), 168
hugs, 73, 198
human r esour ces, 116–17
hunter -gather ers, 117
Iacocca, L ee, 137
IBM, 99–100, 119
imaginary situations, 24–25, 26, 44, 55
compassion and, 83
funeral, 78–79, 83
immune system, 86

--- PAGE 308 ---
impact, 210
impatience, 63
impostor syndr ome, 39–40, 41
income, 2
inferiority, 90
information, 138, 142
insecurity, 160
inspiring, 102
internal critic, 86
interrupting, 129, 130, 182
interviews, 38, 96–97, 113, 116–17, 119, 130, 159
intonation, 10, 106, 139–40, 141, 142, 194–95, 233, 241
introverts, 10, 98, 108
Iowa, University of, 119–20
iPhones, 189
iPod Nano, 136
irritants, 192
irritation, 155
Izuma, K eise, 168
JALIR sequence, 210–11
Joan of Ar c, 101, 112
Jobs, Steve, 2, 101, 108, 112, 146, 189–90
increasing charisma of, 4–5
presentations r ehearsed by, 192
Jones, F ranklin, 175
Jones, Jim, 102
Jordan, Michael, 104, 216
Jungle Book, The  (Kipling), 118
justiﬁcation, 209
Keeler, Jack, 99–100
Kelleher, Herb, 146
Kennedy, John F ., 129
Kerry, John, 107–8
Khurana, R akesh, 215

--- PAGE 309 ---
kindness charisma, 98, 102–4, 107, 109, 110, 112, 133, 158,
171, 175, 214, 231
King, Martin L uther, Jr ., 101, 112
Kipling, R udyar d, 118
Kosslyn, Stephen, 68
Krauss, Stephen, 70
Langer, Ellen, 25
language, 20, 136, 144, 186
Lao Tzu, 24
“lasts,” 177
leadership, 2, 3
compassion needed for, 83
Leahy, R obert, 32
lectur es, 139–40
left frontal lobes, 88
life, enjoying, 17–18
limbic r esonance, 146
Lincoln, Abraham, 74, 136
listening, 14, 17, 26, 100, 128–31, 142, 184, 231, 232, 241
Little P rince, The  (Saint-Exupéry), 185
logic, 144, 163
lovable book, 90
love at ﬁrst sight, 153
Lowndes, L eil, 185
Lurie, Bob, 40
Madonna, 98
Mao Zedong, 112, 220
mark eting, 169
Martinez, Angel, 83
meditation, 12, 15, 16, 18, 45
meetings, 72–73, 96–97
memory car ds, 189–90
mental discomfort, 31–41, 43, 44, 65
metaphors, 189, 190, 233

--- PAGE 310 ---
Method acting, 12, 68
Metta, 87–90, 239–40
Michelangelo, 27
microexpressions, 22, 182
mindfulness discipline, 15, 45
Mindful P ath to Self -Compassion, The  (Ger mer), 87
mindset shif t, 15–16, 224
mind wandering, 16
mirror, 155
mirror neur ons, 145
Miss P iggy, 92–93
MIT, 73
MIT Media Lab, 20, 126, 140
moms, 3
Monitor Gr oup, 40
Monr oe, Marilyn, 1, 4
Multiple Scler osis Association, 203
Muppet Show, The,  92–93
music, 70–71, 95, 96, 174
Musk, Elon, 98–99
Mussolini, Benito, 104, 220
Napoleon I, Emper or of the F rench, 74, 201, 204
narcissism, 85
neediness, 75
Neﬀ, Kristin, 86
negative associations, 131–34, 142
negativity, 37, 38–39, 40, 42, 46
neutralizing, 47–51, 58, 59, 65, 66, 202, 236
suppr essing, 52
negativity bias, 48–49
negotiations, 100, 130
Neur oLeadership Institute, 38
neuronal connections, 68
neuroscience, 11
Newman, P aul, 68

--- PAGE 311 ---
New Scholars, 147–49
New Y ork T imes,  188
Ney, Marshal, 204
Nicklaus, Jack, 67
nocebo eﬀect, 25–26
nodding, 10, 106, 149, 160, 161, 162, 164
numbers, 189–90
Obama, Barack, 109
Ochsner, K evin, 22 n
OﬃceMax, 184
Onassis, Aristotle, 153–54
open-ended questions, 123
Oracle, 119
oscillators, 146
outgoing personalities, 10
owning the stage, 193–94
oxytocin, 73, 170, 198
Paramount Equity, 109, 215
Parkinson’s Law, 55
patience, 100, 103
pauses, 10, 106, 130–31, 141, 234
pausing, 129
in presentations, 196–97
Pavlov, Ivan, 132
PayPal, 98
Penn, Sean, 68
perfor mance, 53, 58
perfor mance r eview, 174
Perot, Ross, 216
Persia, 132
personality, 10, 107–10, 113
personal magnetism, 6
personal space, 150–53
Peter P an, 71

--- PAGE 312 ---
phenylethylamine (PEA), 153
phones, 183–85, 186
physical discomfort, 28–31, 42, 43, 59, 65, 66
physicians, 3
pictur es, 136–39, 142
pitch, 140
placebo eﬀect, 25, 26, 36, 55, 74
Play-Doh, 173–74
postur e, 21, 91, 97, 147, 149, 150, 156–63, 164
authority charisma and, 106
in presentations, 198
Powell, Colin, 5, 104, 112
power, 5, 6, 13, 18–20, 21, 26, 27, 31, 67, 94, 100, 130,
139, 142, 162, 191, 224, 229–30, 231, 234
praise, 207–11
presence, 5–6, 12, 13–18, 26, 27, 31, 63, 129, 142, 154,
224, 229–30, 235
anxiety and, 32
appearance of, 191
body language and, 21
focus charisma and, 100, 231
techniques for, 15
presentations, 7, 72, 187–200, 215, 232, 233–34
charismatic message in, 188–90
colors at, 191
mid-course cor rections, 197–99
Q&As at, 190
rehearsals of, 192–93
supporting points in, 189
warmth in, 194–95
Rao, Srik umar, 53 n
rationalization, 170–71, 186
reality :
mind’s view of, 47–49, 50
rewriting, 51, 52–58, 59–60, 65, 66, 202, 236–37

--- PAGE 313 ---
reassurance, 161, 162, 164
resentment, 57, 58, 75, 130, 207–11
resilience, 64–65
responsibility, 210
responsibility transfer, 34–37, 42, 45, 60, 100, 202, 235–36
Rice, Condoleezza, 5
Riggio, R onald, 143–44
Rock, David, 38
Rocky III, 71
role-playing, 96
romance, 2, 174
Rome, 120
Roosevelt, F ranklin Delano, 136, 194
Saint-Exupéry, Antoine de, 185
sarcasm, 56
satisfaction, 58, 237
Schir o, Tom, 83
Schnabel, Arthur, 130
seating choices, 152–53, 242
Seinfeld, Jer ry, 192, 193
self-acceptance, 85
self-compassion, 84–90, 103, 181, 239
self-conﬁdence, 84, 85–86, 94–95
self-consciousness, 199
self-criticism, 38–39, 40, 42, 50, 86–87, 90
self-doubt, 39–41, 42, 43
self-esteem, 84–85, 94–95
self-evaluation, 85
self-warmth, 84
separation distr ess, 154
shame, 45–46, 50, 90
Sicilienne, The,  196
Sinatra, F rank, 198, 216
situations, 107, 110–13
smiling, 24, 141–42, 184

--- PAGE 314 ---
social comparison, 85
Social Intelligence,  146
social situations, 3
social skills, 23
social smile, 22
soft focus, 155
sounds, 15, 235
Southwest Airlines, 146
space, 158–59
speaking, 131–39, 142, 241
see also pr esentations
Stalin, Joseph, 104, 220
Stanfor d Business School, 40
Stanfor d University, 157, 159
statistics, 189–90
status, 134, 160, 232
authority charisma and, 104–7, 231
stories, 189, 190, 233
Streep, Meryl, 68
stress, 2, 38, 41, 52, 53, 154–55
visualization and, 71
stress hor mones, 38, 52, 170
stress system, 170, 174, 202
students, 3
suicide, 73
sympathy, 82
Tan, Chade-Meng, 45–46
teachers, 116
technical skills, 23
tempo, 140, 141, 142
tension, 59–60, 61
Teresa, Mother, 88, 112
Tesla Motors, 98–99
Texas, University of, 116
Thatcher, Mar garet, 112

--- PAGE 315 ---
Thich Nhat Hanh, 44
threat response, 38
tone, 140
apologies and, 181
criticism and, 179
Tonight Show, The,  192
Top Gun,  71
traﬃc, 56
true smile, 24
trust, 2, 152
uncertainty, 32–37, 42, 101, 167
Uslan, Michael, 40
Vangelis, 71
vision, 203–5, 231, 234
visionary, 210
visionary charisma, 98, 101–2, 103, 107, 108, 109, 110,
112, 136, 167, 231
visualization, 67–74, 96, 231, 238
body language and, 68, 69, 73, 97
of funeral, 78–79, 83
of goodwill, 81
of historical counselors, 74
of invisible angel wings, 81, 158, 171, 174, 194
kindness charisma and, 103
befor e meetings, 72–73
of Metta, 88–89
for phone calls and e-mails, 183
practice for, 69
befor e presentations, 72
voice, 21, 139–42, 182
volume, 140–41, 193–94
vulnerability, 216–18, 221, 243
Walmart, 198

--- PAGE 316 ---
Walton, Sam, 198, 216
warming up, 93–97, 103, 172
warmth, 5, 6, 13, 18–20, 26, 27, 67, 74, 81, 92, 94, 97, 101,
106, 109, 123, 130, 139, 142, 150, 155, 156, 158, 161,
162, 163, 164, 172, 176, 182, 224, 229–30, 231, 232
anxiety and, 32
body language and, 21, 234
criticism and, 179
focus charisma and, 100
handshak es and, 121
kindness charisma and, 102–4, 231
on phone, 185
in presentations, 191, 194–95, 197
self-, 84
vocal, 141–42
Weiss, Alan, 144
white knights, 120
Williams, R edfor d, 170
willpower, 94
Winfrey, Oprah, 75, 108, 109, 110–11
Wise Brain Bulletin,  73
Wiseman Institute, 80
worst-case scenario, 50, 51
writing, 54, 56, 57
OceanofPDF .com